Supply of food and essentials fail people under lockdown
2020-04-13
Bhopal: Distribution and supply on essential items and food have totally failed in the state capital putting the population under lockdown to greater hardships. Helpline nos. publicised for people to access in case of need for ration or food are not being responsive.It’s not that the phones are not picked or complaint is not registered. If caller in lucky the phone is answered but nothing happens after that, complain people from slum areas and social workers, who have pitched in help to such needy.“Every time you make a demand or lodge a complaint about ration, vegetables, medicines or anything, the most common helpline no. given to you is 181, the CM Helpline no., which is now dedicated to redressing complaints relating to COVID-19 or allied subjects. They do register the complaint, but go no further. Earlier, they used to give complaint no. so that you could pursue the matter and see what action has been taken on your complaint but now, they don’t give complaint no. either”, said a government servant on the condition of anonymity.He had made a call for food to people living on the footpath at Banskhedi. “I had gone to distribute food packets for them myself, but they fell short as several people converged at the spot. I made a call then, but they said that only ration can be provided to people (five kg of wheat flour). I said at least provide them that but a week later, they have not received anything.Shezadi, a resident of Blue Moon Colony in Old Bhopal, said “There are several families in my colony, who have nothing to eat. I had also made a call on 181 six days ago. I requested to send some ration for those families. They said only five kg atta (wheat flour) could be provided, but five days on, we are still waiting for them to come”. Shezadi said that she had called up a Bhopal Municipal Corporation (BMC) official, who said “Keep your ration card and Samagra ID ready. We shall give the needy families five kg of wheat flour but he, too, didn’t turn up.Louise, who is working to provide food to residents of Gas Widows’ Colony in Karond, said that once he called up 181 at 8.30 pm to request for food to an elderly widow but they said that they don’t give food after 8.00 pm.He said that there were several people working to provide food to the residents of the colony, many of whom are elderly and alone, but after the complete lockdown and subsequent police action, they are not coming either.District administration spokesperson, Arun Kumar Rathore, when told that helpline no. given by the district administration to request for food or ration were not being responsive, said “There is a BMC official, who is the nodal officer for food. If someone doesn’t get food from anywhere, he should be contacted.” BMC administration said the nodal officer is Vinod Kumar Shukla and his no. is 9424499775.