Surge in prices of ingredients of drugs used against Covid-19
2020-04-17
MUMBAI: Prices of raw materials, also called active pharmaceutical ingredients (API), and basic chemicals used to manufacture Covid drugs have skyrocketed between three and 10 times since March 20, due to opportunistic pricing, black marketing, short supply and weakening of the rupee.


The maximum increase — around 10-fold — is in case of API of hydroxychloroquine, which shot into limelight after US President Trump touted it as a potential Covid-19 treatment, while prices of others, including azithromycin, ivermectin and vitamin D3 have either doubled or trebled, over the last three weeks.

API prices of hydroxychloroquine have touched around Rs 70,000 per kg, from around Rs 6,500 per kg (February), and Rs 7,500 per kg (March), at least four market intermediaries told TOI. In addition, limited quantity of the basic drug is available in the market, exerting further price pressure.

Two main producers of hydroxychloroquine — mainly used for arthritis and lupus -- include Ipca Labs and Zydus Cadila, which manufacture both APIs and finished formulation (drug). “We have not sold any API recently. We need to service large government orders — both central government and state. There is no change in the domestic formulation prices in India. But the cost of producing API has more than doubled, with basic chemicals and raw materials from China going up by five to six times,” said Ipca labs joint managing director AK Jain.

It may be pointed out that the drug is under price control in India. There is a huge surge in the drug’s demand post-Trump’s tweet, as several countries are using it as a potential treatment for certain categories of Covid-19 patients.
Regarding API for azithromycin — the other drug used in combination with hydroxychloroquine for treating coronavirus, since February, prices have doubled to 16,000 a kg. “Prices of APIs have gone up by 80-100% due to a shortage in the market as well as logistics issues (from China). Though demand has gone up in the country, there is also a huge requirement from the US and Europe, where we are also supplying. There is no shortage in the country,” said RK Baheti, chief financial officer of Vadodara-based Alembic, which has around 30% share in the market. The company manufactures API in the country for its captive use, as well as imports from China.

Around 80% of API of azithromycin is imported from China per month, but now it has reduced as Beijing is exporting a bulk of it to Europe and the US, say market experts.

“There is a lot of stock lying with traders and manufacturers, and not enough in the market. This has led to manipulation of prices by intermediaries”, the owner of a medium-scale manufacturing plant in Maharashtra told TOI.

Further, API prices have also been impacted by the appreciation in dollar by around 10%, and imports (of raw materials and chemicals) reducing from China. Prices of another sought-after drug for Covid-19, paracetamol, are stable, while those of vitamin-D3 is up by nearly three times. “The cost of importing raw materials and chemicals from China has gone up substantially with both sea and air shipments becoming expensive. There is also congestion at ports, while logistics is also a challenge,” Mahesh Doshi, president of Indian Drug Manufacturers’ Association, said. There has also been an increase in API prices of Ivermectin, due to imported raw material prices going up, an executive with a mid-level manufacturer stated.

