Surge in Covid-19 cases to test Tamil Nadu’s medical mettle
2020-06-10
CHENNAI: The state may need more beds to treat Covid-19 patients in the coming days, with projections by mathematicians showing the number of active cases at 30,000 by June 20, double the present number, and 40,000 by June 25.


Medical experts said TN is in the ascending limb of the curve and would by mid-July reach the peak that will last a week. The numbers will then see a steady decline before touching the baseline in two months.



Sitabhra Sinha of The Institute of Mathematical Sciences said the R value or the effective reproduction number is now 1.31 =/- 0.01, a drop from 1.99 =/-0.07 between April 30 an May 8, about two weeks after the Koyambedu cluster was identified. Earlier in April, it was at 1.44 =/- 0.02. The R value is the average number of secondary cases per infectious cases where there is some immunity, or some intervention in place.

“If the present growth rate continues, the state will have around 20,000 (could vary between 17,000 and 23,000) active cases by June 13, 30,000 by June 20 and 40,000 by June 25,” he said. Sinha said flattening of the curve in the state depends on many factors including people’s response to lockdown relaxations.

At present, around 74% of beds in the state besides 44% of ICU beds and 72 ventilators remain vacant. Health minister C Vijayabaskar said the government has requested private hospitals to increase bed capacity to admit more patients as Covid cases “are increasing at lightning speed”.

Virologists and public health experts said while Chennai has the most cases, the rest of districts, which are thickly populated and have so far seen fewer cases, will see a second wave with a rise in cases.

T Sundararaman, former dean of TISS’s School of Health System Studies, said that amid the government trying to pacify those complaining about not enough beds, infected people searching for hospital beds may themselves be a major source of spread.

“The single most important measure to prevent the spread is for the government to facilitate picking up a Covid patient in an ambulance and shift him/her to a hospital bed. The other measure is conducting a retrospective and prospective contact tracing. Geographical containment is a waste of time and is not the answer,” he said.

Virologist Dr T Jacob John said while the cases are now spreading to districts, 20% to 25% of the population will be infected before the curve begins to flatten. While the descent after the peak will be slower, Dr John warned that the number of people getting infected post the peak would be larger than pre-peak trend though the infection rate will be slow.

“But the real problem is people were extremely careful in April and May but are now not wearing mask and are going around as if life is normal. If every person wears a mask, the epidemic will really slow down. We should block social interactions but make it safe by wearing a mask. What condom did for HIV, mask will do for coronavirus,” he added.

Former DPH director Dr K Kolandaswamy said several districts including Vellore, Trichy, Thanjavur, Hosur, Salem, Erode, Coimbatore and Kanyakumari will have a second wave with more cases. “To prevent deaths, we should have our elderly and people with comorbidity confined to homes while the number of tests should increase, and people could also have immune boosting drinks like kabasura kudineer.”


