Surviving lockdown with delish dishes
2020-03-29
AHMEDABAD/ VADODARA/SURAT: If you’re in the balcony on a lockdown evening and you suddenly get a whiff of some delicious dal makhani or basil pasta cooking away, don’t be surprised. Even though there are no restaurants open and no app-based food delivery at home, many of us are surviving the lockdown with an array of delish meals. While mother’s time-tested recipes have come to the rescue of many, several chefs are also using social media to post recipes one can try at home.


Chef getting men to cook!

Ahmedabad-based businessman, Vishal Amin, who has always been fond of cooking and has a sizable fan-following on social media, has taken the lockdown as an opportunity to encourage men to cook. “Cooking has conventionally been a woman’s role in the family but it is time equality prevails in that sphere too,” said Amin. “While a lot of men do cook, most don’t and some don’t know how to. So lockdown is the time when men can utilise the down time more creatively. Over the past 15 days, I’ve been busy on Instagram posting recipes and cooking tips that people can try at home.”

Simple meals cooked with love

Vadodara-based celebrity chef and entrepreneur, Shagun Mehra, has been busy responding to the messages she has received from her friends and fans thanking her for the recipe of rice ‘bhakhri’ or ‘kadhi patta’ lemonade. For Mehra, who is currently living in Goa, this is not her usual practice. Since the lockdown, Mehra has been making simple meals and sharing videos of her making these dishes along with her daughter on her Facebook page. “Since I have this talent, I think of it as a service while sitting at home and also motivating people to cook staples that they have,” she said. “I am also including my 11-year-old daughter so that people can understand the cooking is a family activity,” she added.

Italian and Chinese delights 

The head chef at the plush weekend address hotel on the Surat-Dumas Road, Pintu Biswas, has taken this opportunity to connect with the people on social media with his mouth-watering easy-to-make delicacies. “When people are literally under house arrest due to lockdown, I thought of sharing easy-to-cook recipes on social media.”

Harsha Shroff, a celebrity chef providing consultancy to many hotels in the city said, “This is very critical period for the people when they are under lockdown. To get their minds off the virus, I am sharing recipes on Whatsapp and FB,” Shroff said. “Right from Gujarati dishes to Chinese and Italian, there are lot of recipes people can learn when they are locked up in their houses.”


