Surveillance intensified over Covid-19
2020-03-09
Thiruvananthapuram: The health department has intensified the surveillance in the wake of five positive cases of Covid-19 reported from the state. All health workers at the primary level have been asked to intensify their house-to-house monitoring, since the people who tested positive had direct contacts with several people.

All hospitals have been asked to report any suspect cases immediately to the respective district health administration. The screening of passengers at airports will be intensified since there are reports of people getting out of the airport without reporting at the health desks.

People coming from China, Hong Kong, Thailand, Singapore, Japan, South Korea, Vietnam, Nepal, Indonesia, Malaysia, Iran and Italy will be screened at the airports. Those who have travelled from these countries after February 10 and haven’t reported to the state health department, has been asked to immediately report the nearest health centre. 

Health minister K K Shailaja has urged all the people to support the government to prevent any spreading of the virus in the community. “Only through community participation can we succeed in tackling this issue. Hence, everyone who have travelled from the infected regions have to report immediately to the nearest health centre,” said the minister.

Shailaja also warned of strict action against those who defy government orders. The government is closely monitoring the situation and all necessary arrangements have been made to prevent any epidemic-like situation.

“At present the focus of the government is to save the lives of people who have tested positive. They are stable and the doctors have said there is nothing to worry. The second focus is on to prevent the spreading of the virus in the community. For this, we are taking measures,” said the minister.

The number of hospitals with isolation wards have been increased in Pathanamthitta now. If situation demands, then there will be more isolation wards in other districts too. All doctors have been urged to strictly adhere to the treatment protocol issued by the health department.


