Sushma Verma, Mirabai Chanu urge people to follow PM's appeal and light diyas, candles to fight COVID-19
2020-04-05
NEW DELHI: Indian women cricket team player Sushma Verma and weightlifter Mirabai Chanu on Sunday urged people to follow Prime Minister Narendra Modi's appeal to light diyas and candles tonight at 9 pm for nine minutes to fight the darkness spread by the coronavirus crisis.


Verma took to Twitter and posted a video in which she said: "Hello everyone! I hope you all are safe at your home with your loved ones. It is a reminder of about tonight, what we have to do is turn off the lights of your home at 9 pm and light candles, diyas or mobile flashlights for nine minutes. Let's not cross the line of social distancing. It is just to challenge the darkness which is spread by coronavirus crisis."

The cricketer captioned the video as: "Its time to stand together to fight against Covid-19 and express our solidarity & commitment by lighting candles, diyas, torches or mobile flashlights in balconies or doorsteps of our houses at 9pm today for 9 minutes. #Baje9Minutes @narendramodi @KirenRijiju @CMOFFICEHP."


Its time to stand together to fight against Covid-19 and express our solidarity & commitment by lighting candles, d… https://t.co/pWeOdGfUk4— Sushma Verma (@ImSushVerma) 1586079442000
 News in BriefExplore BriefsCWG champion Mirabai also posted a video on her Twitter handle requesting everyone to join the movement for the nation. "Our Prime Minister has appealed to us for lighting candles, diya or mobile's flashlight tonight at 9 pm for nine minutes. Following his appeal, we all will turn off the lights of our home and will light candles and diyas and will fight coronavirus," she said.

The athlete captioned the video as: "I am ready to light candles and diyas for 9 minutes at 9 pm today. I request everyone to join this movement for our nation. Lets spread the power of light. @PMOIndia @narendramodi @KirenRijiju @manipurmygov @NBirenSingh @Media_SAI @IndiaSports @WeAreTeamIndia."


I am ready to light candles and diyas for 9 minutes at 9 pm today. I request everyone to join this movement for ou… https://t.co/rtDePmDRvk— Saikhom Mirabai Chanu (@mirabai_chanu) 1586077213000
Earlier, in a video message, the Prime Minister had asked citizens to turn all lights off in their houses at 9 pm on Sunday (April 5) and to stand at their doors or windows with a candle, diya and torch for nine minutes to show solidarity with each other in the battle against the COVID-19.

This is in follow up to the 'Taali, thali' event held on March 22, the day when 'Janata curfew' was observed throughout the country. Modi had reminded people to be on their terrace and balconies and clap to express their gratitude for all those who were 'working 24/7' to fight COVID-19.

The total number of COVID-19 positive cases rose to 3,374 in India on Sunday, as per the data provided by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.

Out of these cases, 3030 are active cases, 267 have been cured or discharged, while 77 deaths have been reported so far in the country. 

