Delhi: Suspicious activity? No, it’s just coronavirus anxiety
2020-05-26
NEW DELHI: A passenger at Indira Gandhi International Airport frequently pulled out a bottle and rubbed its contents on his hands. His evident nervousness would have also marked him out for closer scrutiny by security personnel in normal times. But it was Monday, the first day of resumption of passenger flights at the airport, and Ahmed leaving Delhi for Patna, was in two minds, like many other flyers, about whether he had made the right decision to fly when Covid-19 infection still hadn’t abated. “There’s high risk, I know,” admitted Ahmed, “yet it is important for us to get back home too.”


Most passengers TOI spoke to at Terminal 3 said they were apprehensive of the situation on the airport concourses and inside the aircraft. Several passengers reassured themselves by donning full-fledged personal protective equipment (PPE) gear. One of them, requesting anonymity, explained, “I wasn’t sure whether the flight would be packed, but regardless, a closed environment is dangerous and I didn’t want to take a risk.”

Flyers certainly found things different at the airport when it reopened on Monday. For one, masks have become mandatory, and there are Delhi Police teams instructing everyone to keep faces covered and to maintain social distancing. The cops also stepped in to separate people standing too close to each other in the queues, leading to serpentine lines forming outside the departure entrance.

Passengers even used toothpicks to operate machines and to ‘press’ buttons while completing their web check-in on the available machines. Wheelchairs were thoroughly disinfected before people dared to use them. Those who did not have protective items like hand sanitisers, gloves and face shields bought them at counters that have popped up exclusively to sell Covid-19 gear.

“I am wearing a mask and am regularly using a sanitiser. That’s the best I can do, I suppose,” said Prashan Kumar, 35, a software professional working in Gurgaon. “I am both scared and nervous, but also excited to be going home.” Kumar’s family lives in Patna. Raman Saini, leaving for Bhopal with his wife and his 7-month old baby, worried, “We aren’t sure whether to cover the baby’s face or not. I think we will use a piece of cloth inside the aircraft.”

Before encountering the CISF personnel standing behind a glass shield to avoid direct contact, flyers pushed their luggage into an ultra-violet baggage scanning machine. However, many people didn’t immediately learn of this requirement at the entry point UV sanitising machines because no airport official was present to guide them.

Some of those arriving at the Delhi airport on Monday complained about inadequate sanitisation facilities during the process of exiting the airport. Before boarding, they said, they were provided with a face shield, a sanitiser and gloves by the airline. But, said, Vinay, 23, a student arriving from Ahmedabad, the travellers were not sanitised or physically scanned after landing and they proceeded to the exits. An airport official, however, explained that the individuals were thermally screened by a machine when they passed it.


