Suspected patients test -ve for Covid-19: Jipmer
2020-03-22
Puducherry: Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research (Jipmer) has appealed to people to ignore fake messages being circulated on social media platforms that patients with Covid-19 infection have been admitted at the institute. 

Jipmer director Rakesh Aggarwal on Saturday clarified that the messages circulating on social media platforms on Covid-19 cases are ‘incorrect’. He said all the suspected patients tested by the institute till March 20 evening were found to be negative. He regretted that some of the messages on social media carried suspected patients’ names, their addresses and photographs. 

“Everyone is hereby reminded that privacy is a basic right of every individual. Even more importantly, patient confidentiality is an important principle in medical ethics and is considered as a sacrosanct right. The institute and its staff are committed to ensuring that the identity of the patients and their test results are not made available to anyone other than the treating medical team. Others are also requested to respect these principles,” he said.

The institute has been equipped with necessary facilities and trained healthcare personnel as per the standards prescribed by the Union government to test for Covid-19 infection and extend treatment if the patients test positive. The institute has undertaken several measures and imposed restrictions to avoid overcrowding and spread of infection adhering to the Union government’s guidelines. 

Meanwhile, Puducherry restaurants’ association (PRA) has extended support to the ‘janata curfew’ called by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and has decided to close restaurants and eateries on March 22.

“We take this opportunity to extend our sincere gratitude and heartfelt thanks to all doctors, nurses, healthcare workers and government authorities for their selfless service during these testing times,” said PRA president Abdul Subhan.

Lieutenant governor Kiran Bedi, while outlining the importance of the ‘janata curfew’ on Sunday said the curfew will prevent transmission of the virus from human-to-human for 14 hours. The curfew will reduce the risk of people contracting virus in open public places and ensure the natural death of the virus. 

Moreover, the 14-hour curfew will help people familiarise themselves with self-isolation and prepare them to face hardships, if any, in the future. It will also make people pledge to follow safe, healthy and hygienic practices and adhere to instructions of authorities to prevent the incidence and spread of the Covid-19 infection.

Above all, the curfew is to recognise and appreciate those who have been tirelessly working to combat the disease.


