‘Suspected case was 800km away from Wuhan’
2020-01-29
Chandigarh: The suspected patient of novel coronavirus (nCoV) admitted to PGI is stable and no organ dysfunction has been reported, doctors said on Tuesday. The patient will remain in the hospital till the National Institute of Virology, Pune, sends its report.

Dr Vikas Suri, internal medicine department, PGI said, “The patient has travelled to various provinces of China from January 16. He was 800km away from Wuhan, the epicenter of the virus. He returned to India on January 22 and developed fever on January 26.

He said, “The patient had recurrent fever and he reported to the emergency with his wife. His vitals were fine. We took his family detail and quarantined his daughter, wife and mother at home.”

“As the family members have no symptoms, as per the protocols, we have home quarantined them,” said Dr Suri.

The Pune institute has received the throat swab and blood samples of the patient. “We have sent the samples for both H1N1 and nCoV tests. This is the season for influenza as well,” said Dr Suri.

“The blood samples will try and find the antigens. As this is a new virus, it is not known if it will enter the blood stream or not,” said Dr Gagandeep Grover, state programme officer, Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme, Punjab,

The suspected patient is under observation in the communicable diseases and isolation ward in PGI. “There are some recent studies in the Lancet and the New England Journal of Medicine, which report that unlike the H1N1, this virus does not affect the throat but causes pneumonia. However, this is in a very small sample and cannot be generalized,” said Dr Suri. He said, “We can only focus on prevention by maintaining hygiene and regular hand wash.”

The NIV is the only authorized laboratory for testing the virus in the country. “We had a video-conferencing with the Union health secretary on Monday. It was informed that the NIV is receiving daily around 50 samples from all states,” said Dr Suri.


