Suspected Covid-19 patients to be quarantined outside Coimbatore
2020-03-17
COIMBATORE: The district administration has identified a facility outside the city to quarantine those showing symptoms of Covid-19.


“Since both the Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital and the ESI Hospital are public places that are always crowded, we have decided to quarantine the suspected patients in a space belonging to a private college located 15 kilometres away from the Coimbatore airport,” collector K Rajamani said on Monday, without revealing the exact location. 

While awaiting the test results of the 49-year-old Thailand man and the 28-year-old city woman who had returned from Qatar, the public health department has intensified checks along the Coimbatore-Kerala border. 

Though health workers were focusing on disinfecting vehicles, including buses coming from Kerala to the city, now department officials are checking all bus passengers using thermal scanners to find out fever patients.

“We are ensuring that we don’t get Covid-19 patients from Kerala and Karnataka. Besides cleaning buses from Kerala, we are also checking passengers to find out those with fever and flu symptoms,” said a public health department official. “We also give them pamphlets with the phone number to contact if they come across anyone with a travel history with flu symptoms.”

The Covid-19 test results of the man and the woman admitted to the Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital’s exclusive ward are expected on Monday evening.

The Southern Railway has set up help desks at all major stations including Coimbatore Junction, where passengers with flu symptoms can get themselves checked. “If we find people suffering from flu and those who had contact with a Covid-19 patient or someone with a travel history, we would hand them over to the health department,” said a railway spokesperson. “We are also distributing pamphlets for creating awareness.”

Meanwhile, the State government has taken efforts to ensure that the virus is not transmitted from Kerala. On Sunday, the chief minister had ordered closure of all malls and theatres in the districts that share a border with Kerala till March 31.


