Covid-19 outbreak in Gurugram: Suspend our services too, say wary Kherki Daula toll staffers
2020-03-23
GURUGRAM: With hardly any vehicles at the Kherki Daula toll plaza, it was an unusually quiet Sunday morning for the operators, giving them a break from their daily routine.


 Coronavirus in India live updates

However, some employees voiced resentment that their services hadn’t yet been suspended in view of Covid-19 outbreak. The lockdown in city and other districts does not cover them, as trucks that carry essential goods are still operating and cross the toll.

The toll management has called upon the NHAI and the ministry of road transport and highways to provide some relief. Some workers urged authorities to let them put themselves in self-quarantine.

“Services were stopped during demonetisation too. The current scenario is much more serious and risks human lives. The ministry must show some sensitivity towards toll plaza workers as we are more exposed and vulnerable to the transmission of the virus,” said a Skylark official, not wishing to be named.

While the toll management has provided masks and sanitisers to staff, there is anxiety owing to the fact that the workers have been dealing with thousands of people on a daily basis, many of them heading to or returning from the airport. “Are we not humans or do we not deserve to quarantine ourselves? Until now the city wasn’t locked down so we still consoled ourselves. But now transportation activities will be shut. Relaxing our services for a week or so won’t disrupt anything,” a toll operator said.

Many employees claimed that they struggled on Sunday to get to the toll plaza as public transport was largely suspended. They fear, their daily struggles are only going to compound. “From tomorrow, when the borders are sealed, even fewer people would be able to come. Why not allow a complete lockdown for us too?” said another lane operator.

A Skylark official said operators and supervisors are vulnerable to infection. “Despite FASTags and cashless transactions, these workers still come in contact with thousands of people. It’s high time the authorities suspended the services, at least till March 31,” the official said. Sources in NHAI, however, said there was no such plan to suspend services at the moment. However, the ministry may come up with a necessary advisory if the need is felt. Officials also claimed that with FASTag being implemented at toll plazas, more than 80% of the transactions have gone digital, with either no or limited human interaction.


