Bengaluru: Suspected coronavirus cases to be treated at four private hospitals too
2020-01-31
BENGALURU: People with travel history to China can henceforth seek treatment and get tested for coronavirus infection at select private hospitals in Bengaluru. Hitherto, Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Chest Diseases (RGICD) was the only hospital in the city authorised to treat suspected cases. 


The decision was taken at a meeting held by chief secretary Vijay Bhaskar on Thursday morning with officials of health and family welfare department and RGICD.

On Thursday, TOI had published about self-reported patients complaining of lack of facilities in the isolation ward of RGICD. The patients demanded they be shifted to private hospitals, raising concerns over cross infection within the ward. 

At the meeting, it was decided that four more hospitals in Bengaluru be allowed to admit patients with travel history to China. Manipal Hospitals, Apollo, Narayana Health and Fortis were asked to set up isolation wards for keeping suspected cases under observation. Patients at the RGICD isolation ward were told they could shift to any of these four private hospitals if they wanted. One person is likely to shift to Manipal Hospitals. Isolation wards will be set up at every district-level government hospital for suspected coronavirus patients.

Besides, two labs in Bengaluru will be upgraded to test for coronavirus. The branch of National Institute of Virology located in RGICD and another lab at Bangalore Medical College and Research Institute will conduct coronavirus tests. Karnataka was sending sputum and blood samples of suspected patients to NIV, Pune. 


4 people found negative
Of the 13 self-reported suspected coronavirus cases at RGICD, four patients have tested negative. Tests reports of nine others, including a Chinese woman, are awaited. “On Thursday night, one more patient came to the hospital with travel history to China and his sputum and blood samples are yet to be sent for testing,” said authorities. 

Family returned from Wuhan, neighbours worried

Residents of an apartment complex on Bannerghatta Road were a worried lot on Thursday when they found a family of four members in their midst had recently visited Wuhan in China, epicentre of the infection. 

“While the family has been saying they are fine, the apartment RWA has been asking them to get tested. Calls made to the RGICD landline number seeking help went unanswered,” said sources. 


