Swine flu strategy to check coronavirus deaths in Rajasthan
2020-04-19
JAIPUR: The state health department has adopted a swine flu-like strategy to check deaths due to Covid-19. According to experts, both the diseases have similar initial symptoms and the pattern of death is almost the same. 


So far, 19 people have lost their lives to coronavirus in the state. During the 2015 swine flu outbreak, the most vulnerable population was elderly, pregnant women and people having medical conditions such as diabetes, hypertension, lung diseases, chronic kidney diseases, chronic diseases related to heart and liver as majority of deaths happened among the vulnerable group, a health department official said. This time around, all the 19 deaths so far happened among the same vulnerable group of population who had pre-existing chronic diseases.

“All 19 deaths happened among the people who had diabetes, hypertension or any other pre-existing diseases such as diabetes or kidney-related ailments,” said Dr Ravi Prakash Sharma, additional director (health). 

He said it was the time when people having pre-existing diseases and those who belong to vulnerable category should take extra precautions and also it was the responsibility of the younger generation to keep elderly at their homes safe by not mixing with them till Covid-19 fades away. However, the health department after taking lessons from the 2015 swine flu outbreak, in which hundreds of people had died, has decided to conduct tests of the vulnerable population to detect Covid-19 early so that early treatment becomes possible to save their lives.

However, it is seen that those young people who do not have any co-morbidity, despite being tested positive, do not show any symptoms, which indicates that such population are carriers of the virus. 

According to SMS Hospital administration officials, at least 70% of the cases were asymptomatic as they do not have fever, cold or cough. This has prompted the health department to lay emphasis on protecting the elderly from being infected.


