H1N1 claimed more young lives, Covid-19 mainly targets elderly
2020-05-06
PUNE: The novel coronavirus which has triggered Covid-19 primarily affects the elderly, unlike swine flu (H1N1) which was particularly serious among young healthy adults.


A study of fatalities due to the two pandemics — swine flu which started in 2009 and the present Covid-19 — shows that the first one mainly claimed young lives by inducing what is known as the “cytokine storm”, a phenomenon in which an over-reactive immune system reacts violently to a foreign pathogen.



Covid-19, on the other hand, has primarily attacked the elderly by taking advantage of weakened immunity and a history of illnesses. 

This is why experts believe that the number of Covid-19 deaths in India — a country with a “younger” population than say Italy or Spain — has been relatively low. 

“Swine flu was particularly dangerous for young but otherwise healthy adults as it caused the ‘cytokine storm’ in which the patient’s hyper-activated immune system causes fatal damage to the lungs,” said epidemiologist Amitav Banerjee. “But Covid-19 has been causing respiratory complications among the elderly due to decreased immunity and co-morbidities.” 

Numbers reveal the difference between the two infections — 85% of those who died of swine flu in India were below 60 years of age. But 75% of Covid-19 deaths have been of those 60 or above. 

While the swine flu pandemic started in 2009, India witnessed a massive surge of infections in 2015 when more than 2,500 people died, compared to 218 deaths just a year before. In Maharashtra, more than 39,000 people were infected in 2015. 

“In that one year, the toll from Maharashtra, Gujarat, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh surpassed the entire H1N1 pandemic toll through 2009 and 2010. The analysis of deaths clearly shows that a significant number of young adults had died of swine flu-induced complications,” Banerjee said.

Senior physician D B Kadam, head of the task force in Pune, said: “The swine flu pandemic primarily affected children and young adults. As many as 80% of the deaths were among people younger than 65.”

That was unusual, considering that most strains of flu viruses, including those that cause seasonal flu, cause the highest percentage of deaths in people 65 or older.

“But in the case of swine flu, the elderly seemed to have built up enough immunity to the group of viruses that H1N1 belongs to,” said senior paediatrician Sharad Agarkhedkar, former president of the Indian Medical Association’s Maharashtra chapter. Agarkhedkar was involved as an investigator in the swine flu vaccine trials.

The deaths of young people — mainly those between 21 and 60 — caused concern around the world. “This age group registered the maximum fatalities 2009 onward,” Agarkhedkar said.

He explained: “Some influenza viruses, including swine flu, can kill a high number of young people by inducing the cytokine storm. This phenomenon also explains why the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic killed more healthy, young adults.”

But Covid-19 has been different. “The elderly are at risk today because of reduced immunity, body reserves and multiple associated comorbidities such as diabetes, hypertension, chronic kidney disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,” said senior public health expert Subhash Salunke, who is technical advisor to the state government on the Covid-19 containment plan.

“Epidemiological (disease spread) rates also depend on the demography of a particular population. It is true that India has a predominantly young population and this may be one of the reasons. It may also be that we are still in the early phase of the Covid-19 epidemic and our early measure of lockdown has prevented the elderly from being infected,” said Mumbai-based pulmonolgist Yatin Dholakia.

It is possible that India is missing some Covid-19 deaths, but fatalities have been noticeably lower than those in certain countries.

“However, Covid-19’s final case fatality rate cannot be determined until we carry out extensive surveys to track down hidden infections. Once we have this proper denominator, we can determine how much deadlier Covid-19 has been — if it has surpassed swine flu,” Banerjee said.

