Coronavirus: Telangana cases surge, 199 positive in a day
2020-06-01
HYDERABAD: Telangana on Sunday recorded 199 new novel coronavirus cases, the highest single-day surge in the twin states, even as five persons died, taking the death toll to 82.


On a day the Telangana government issued more relaxations and hassle-free inter-state movement, the total number of positive cases in the state jumped to 2,698.

Greater Hyderabad has emerged as a major worry for authorities as it accounted for 122 of the total cases, with the government blaming people for not abiding by lockdown rules.

Health department officials said they were worried about several areas of Hyderabad and urged the police to strictly enforce lockdown in all the new containment zones.

“People are travelling across the state and some of them are not following the basic preventive measures such as wearing a mask, maintaining safe physical distancing and not overcrowding,” the government said in a statement.

“The lockdown has been relaxed since May 16. It is being observed that there is a lot of mobility and movement of people from all walks of life and of all age groups,” it added.

Apart from Hyderabad, Ranga Reddy district also saw a surge with 40 new cases reported on Sunday.

New coronavirus cases were reported in Mahbubnagar, Suryapet, Nirmal, Warangal Urban, Yadadri, Medchal, Jagtiyal, Medak, Khammam and Jangaon.

With the latest cases turning positive, Yadadri, Khammam and Jangaon district moved from the list of districts with no positive cases a fortnight ago to the list of districts having new cases.

The number of districts which have not reported new cases in a fortnight has now reduced to 10 from 18, about a week back.

A total of 1,428 patients have recovered from Covid-19 in the state and have been discharged. In fact, Telangana ranks sixth-highest among states having over 2,000 positive cases, in terms of recovery rate of Covid-19 patients.

The recovery rate in Telangana is 56. 5%, which is higher than the national average of 47.8% as per latest records of the central ministry of health and family welfare.


