Telangana reports one death, 17 fresh positive Covid-19 cases
2020-05-03
HYDERABAD: With Telangana again reporting less than 20 fresh cases on Saturday, the focus of the state government is slowly shifting towards steps needed to ease the lockdown and revive select sectors of the economy after May 7.


Telangana reported 17 new cases on Saturday, taking the overall tally to 1,061. All the cases came from Hyderabad and Ranga Reddy districts. The state now has 533 active cases while 499 people have so far been discharged. Also, one more person died in the state, taking the toll to 29.

During the day, state health minister Eatala Rajender held a meeting with senior officials on the way ahead after some relaxations are given post May 7. The focus was on government hospitals and private clinics resuming their out-patient wings. Sources said guidelines will be issued on ensuring that enough precautions are taken at the clinics so that they don’t become virus hotspots. If things go well, the government may even consider allowing elective surgeries.

At the same time, chief secretary Somesh Kumar held a tele-conference with real estate developers and director general of police Mahender Reddy along with other officials on the steps to be taken in the wake of construction activity being given the green signal to start work. Sources said that the state government is hoping that this will ensure many of the migrant workers don’t return home and stay back in the state.

The chief secretary assured that the developers that the state government will give them all the support needed to start work. He urged the builders to instill confidence among the workers, particularly migrant workers through counselling and extending incentives, facilities, medical care.

All out efforts should made so that labourers feel comfortable, Kumar said at the meeting. He told the developers that the state government would take steps to ensure smooth supply of steel, cement, sand, bricks and other raw material. The DGP said that smooth movement of construction goods vehicles would be ensured through the three police commissionerates.

