Telangana tops south in secondary infection rate for Covid cases
2020-06-06
HYDERABAD: Telangana tops the secondary infection rate charts in the south while it stands sixth across India amid growing fears over a rapid surge in Covid-19 cases. 

In an elaborate analysis of novel coronavirus positive cases recorded in all the states and Union territories, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has found out that secondary infection among Covid-19 contacts is one of the highest in Telangana despite a low testing rate. ICMR tested Covid-19 cases recorded between February 2 and April 30. As per the study, 5.6 persons had tested positive for 100 tests done on asymptomatic, symptomatic and unspecified category of people. 

 

Secondary infection occurs during or after treatment for another infection. It may be caused by the first treatment or by changes in the immune system. In this case, it is seen as the percentage of positives among asymptomatic and symptomatic contacts of confirmed Covid-19 cases and among unspecified people, a medical expert explained.

The tests had been categorised into categories such as symptomatic international traveller, symptomatic contacts of confirmed cases, asymptomatic contacts of confirmed cases, healthcare staff in all categories, severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and influenza-like illness in red zones.


Telangana conducted 7,500 tests in February-April

As per the ICMR study, Telangana had conducted 7,593 tests among symptomatic and asymptomatic contacts of confirmed Covid-19 positive cases between February and April. It had also done another 5,952 tests among unspecified people for different reasons. Of the total 13,545 tests done, 752 people had tested positive for the novel coronavirus, it said.

“However, during the said period, more than 18,000 tests have been conducted in the state,” an official source claimed. 

Telangana health minister Eatala Rajender agreed the high secondary infection rate is a cause for worry. “We are following the ICMR guidelines and conducting tests, but the spurt in secondary infection is not boding well for the state,” he said.

Public health experts meanwhile observed that the high secondary infection rate among people calls for aggressive testing. “Despite Telangana’s low testing record, the secondary infection rate is very high. This is a big concern,” said an official on condition of anonymity.

Confirming the worst fears, ISB professor Sarang Deo said Telangana was better equipped than several other states to carry out Covid-19 testing. “But, the tests done per 1,000 people is very low,” he pointed out.


