Telangana veering towards extending lockdown, awaits Centre’s nod
2020-04-08
HYDERABAD: As people wait with bated breath, indications are that the lockdown could be extended for a longer duration in Telangana. Dropping enough hints in this regard, municipal administration minister KT Rama Rao on Tuesday said lockdown is the only way to contain the spread of coronavirus and reiterated that chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao is ready to extend it to combat the virus.




The chief minister, who had on Monday asked Prime Minister Narendra Modi to extend the lockdown by at least two more weeks, is likely to continue with the clampdown even if the Centre relaxes the lockdown, sources said. “However, the government wants to wait till the Centre announces its decision,” sources said. 

Officials recalled that the state government had declared a lockdown days before the Centre announced a nationwide lockdown on March 24. The government had also sealed the inter-state borders. “The CM had even asked the Centre to stop international flights. The state government has powers to impose restrictions and implement lockdown under the Epidemic Disease Act, 1897. But, issues like allowing flight movement does not come under the state’s purview,” a senior government official said.

“The lockdown should be lifted only after ensuring that there is no local transmission of Covid-19,” KTR, who is also working president of TRS, told the media on Tuesday. 

He said it is not possible to carry out tests for all the people in a country which has a population of 130 crore. “If the government allows private hospitals and diagnostic centres to conduct tests, it will lead to panic. The government cannot allow such mass screening except at hotspots,” he said.

The government believes that there will be clarity on the number of Covid-19 positive cases, especially attendees of Tablighi Jamaat and their primary contacts, by April 10. “Their 14-day incubation time will be completed by April last week,” sources said. KCR has instructed party floor leaders — Nama Nageswara Rao and K Keshava Rao —to strongly express the government’s view during the video-conference with PM at the all-party meet in Delhi on Wednesday.


