Covid-19: Tablighi head, six others booked for culpable homicide
2020-04-16
NEW DELHI: Tablighi Jamaat chief Maulana Saad Khandalvi and his six associates have been booked for culpable homicide under IPC 304 as the prima facie probe indicates that their action has led to deaths due to novel coronoavirus infections.


Confirming the move, Delhi Police PRO Mandeep Randhawa said IPC 304 had been added to the existing FIR after taking the public prosecutor’s opinion.

While the IPC sections under which Maulana Saad was earlier booked were bailable, this is a non-bailable offence, said a source. A person can be sentenced to jail for 10 years if found guilty under IPC 304. 


More on Covid-19


 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
  21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
  How to quarantine yourself at home
  Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news
 
The Crime Branch has also sent notices to 18 people who were in the organising committee of the Tablighi Jamaat. Eleven of them are in quarantine. They have been asked to reveal the names of the attendees and the reason behind continuing with the Jamaat activities at the Alai Markaz, its headquarters, despite the announcement of the lockdown.

The cops had earlier sent two notices to the Tablighi chief with 26 questions. In his reply, the maulana has claimed that he doesn’t know the answer to many questions as he was not present at the Markaz due to his quarantine period.

With his quarantine period about to get over, police will now record his statement and decide on whether to arrest him, a source said. Maulana Saad was last seen on March 28 and later claimed through an audio message that he was in self-isolation. He has been communicating with police through his legal counsel. His representative earlier said the cleric would appear before police if called.

Police have also issued a lookout circular against the 1,890 foreigners who attended the Markaz event and are now suspected to be hiding in different parts of India. Several teams have been formed, too, to trace people who were in touch with the Markaz members.

