Tablighi Jamaat chief traced to Delhi's Zakir Nagar residence
2020-04-09
NEW DELHI: Tablighi Jamaat chief Maulana Saad Khandalvi has finally been traced to his residence in Zakir Nagar. It is now being ascertained whether he has been infected by novel coronavirus. His kin had earlier told the cops that he was in quarantine.


Delhi Police will now get him tested by doctors and may question him over a video call. A decision on whether Saad will be shifted to a government quarantine centre or he will be allowed to stay at his residence till he completes his self-isolation period is yet to be taken.

Saad, along with six others from Tablighi Jamaat, were booked for violating government orders and holding a congregation despite a ban on public gatherings. Police are on the lookout for the rest of the members.



Coronavirus pandemic: Live updates

In his reply to the Crime Branch’s notice issued earlier last week, Maulana Saad had said that he was in self-isolation. Delhi Police had later sought documents and information related to the congregation.

Police had earlier said that Saad was untraceable at his residence in Zakir Nagar. Teams were also sent to his other houses at Nizamuddin and Muzaffarnagar to question his family members.



More on Covid-19


 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
  21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
  How to quarantine yourself at home
  Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news
 

Saad was allegedly staying with a relative in self-isolation when the cops tracked him down. Police have asked for Saad’s medical reports from his family members.

The Markaz representative had, however, refuted allegations that Saad was absconding. He had informed media that if police asked Saad to appear for questioning, the Markaz chief would be available.


It's time to mask up and stay safe: Join TOI's #MaskIndia campaign

Cops are, meanwhile, also planning to question Saad’s son, Maulana Yousuf, who had issued statements and put sermons on the YouTube channel, Delhi Markaz, asking the followers to join prayers at mosques in defiance of the social distancing norms.


