Tablighi Meet: Officials of 5 districts in Vidarbha on a hunt
2020-04-03
Authorities in the districts of Yavatmal, Wardha, Chandrapur, Amravati and Nagpur are on a chase to hunt down a few who are likely to have attended or come in contact with those at the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in New Delhi in late February and early March. With many carriers of the dreaded coronavirus emerging from the event which was held at Nizamuddin, an attempt is being made to identify them and put them in isolation.

In Yavatmal, the administration has admitted six persons, who were at Nizamuddin, in the isolation ward of the GMCH there. The Wardha administration has traced eight such persons and quarantined one from Arni along with his family members. Currently, the district is coronavirus free.

The Chandrapur administration on Wednesday traced a 33-year-old man who had attended the Tablighi congregation. He was picked up from his father-in-law’s house in Rajura and admitted to the Chandrapur GMCH’s isolation ward. His test results have come negative. A native of Kagaznagar in Telangana, the person had arrived by train to Ballarpur on March 18.

Authorities have also confirmed that 11 Turkmenistan residents, who were found residing in a mosque in Chandrapur district, had not attended the Tablighi Jamaat meet. They had arrived in the city on March 3.

Ramnagar police had detained 14 persons, including the 11, from a mosque in Tukum locality on March 25. Three others are from Delhi, Odisha and Kerala. All these persons were taken to Chandrapur GMCH for Covid-19 testing and found negative.

In Nagpur district, so far no person has been found to have attended the New Delhi meet. However, the administration has a list of 68 persons with history of travel to New Delhi. On Wednesday, the city police and Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) traced city’s 54 persons. Top police sources said around 16 are likely to have attended the meet. All 54 have been quarantined at the MLA hostel for 14 days.

Swab samples of all were taken to be tested. The reports of all are likely to come on Thursday.

The move is as per state government’s letter directing the authorities here to put all persons under quarantine citing. The letter said they may have come in contact with the positive persons of New Delhi. 

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe told TOI, “We received a list of 68 persons from the home ministry. We identified names with their places. There are two from Pune, one from Yavatmal and 13 from rural parts of Nagpur district.”

Of the 52 from the city, four claimed they had never travelled to New Delhi or any other place in last one month. “48 people, some with family members, confirmed about visiting New Delhi,” said Mundhe, adding that none of the 54 had any kind of symptoms.

Adding that “it is not necessary that all 54 attended the Delhi meet”, Mundhe said, “We are only following government directions.” The 13 from Nagpur rural too have been traced and are being brought to MLA Hostel.

Mundhe also appealed to all those who returned from Delhi after March 15 to inform the NMC. “Cases of Covid-19 are increasing every day and we need to control it. For their own safety as well as those of family members and others, such people should call up NMC control room, App or officials and get tests done,” he said.

Of the city's positive cases, a Khamla businessman, his manager and a resident of a housing society in Central Nagpur were Delhi returnees. A delay in getting tests done resulted in some family members too testing positive.

The police sources, who told TOI that 30% of the 54 had attended the Delhi meet, said, “ We have segregated them as per police jurisdiction. The list contains names of people who were in a particular area. The Delhi meet was held in one of the localities of this area.”

TOI has a copy of the list. 

Scrutinizing the list, it can be seen that 31 are Muslims and the others are from different religions. Those from city are from various localities. 

According to Abdul Bari Patel, secretary of the Tablighi Markaz secretary in Nagpur, only seven members from city attended the international conference in New Delhi before returning on March 10 and 11. They were part of the 17-member representatives from Nagpur-Chattisgarh Markaz, which had a quota of 25 people for the jodh (meet) where over 1,000 people had congregated.

Patel told TOI that one of the 7 had fallen sick but there were no symptoms of Covid19. “The member was admitted to Dr Aziz Khan’s hospital in city for urinary tract infection followed by pneumonia. Later, he was tested for coronavirus too but the result was negative,” he said.

Bari said all others are currently normal and have self-isolated themselves. Three members had taken a flight to Delhi while others took a train. On March 10, only one returned by flight while others reached Nagpur on March 11 by train.

The seminary secretary said one international group of 8 from Myanmar arrived in Nagpur on March 6. This group reported to Delhi HQ before moving on to other parts of the country. Bari said all have been tested and are normal.

Five domestic jamaats, comprising 41 men and 5 women, are also camping in the city since February 28. They arrived in different batches from Delhi, Manipur and Jabalpur.

“No one has any symptoms. Yet all would be tested today. The jamaat at Mankapur was shifted to a rented flat while others are at Palloti Masjid, a madrasa in Mominpura, Darul Khal in Takia and local home in Azad Bunkar Colony,” he said.

The last one arrived on March 14 in the city and all of them were stranded after the lockdown. Bari said that the Markaz has submitted complete details of all to the special branch of city police.

The visitors have also been given a copy of government guidelines on social distancing and other precautions in case anyone falls ill. “We have asked them to follow the norms religiously,” said Bari.


