Tablighi dragnet catches all, Hindus, Muslims, lawyers, tailors
2020-04-03
NAGPUR: A lawyer from Nagpur, now working in Delhi, lives around 3km from the Tablighi Jamaat Markaz at Nizamuddin, and uses a SIM card registered in her father’s name. She has been getting calls from government officials in Nagpur asking for her father, as they want to move him into quarantine, since ‘his’ phone was detected close to the venue of the Tablighi Jamaat event at New Delhi.

Vijaya Pandey (named changed) says, “There is some confusion it seems. I haven’t even stepped out of my house in Delhi since the lockdown. Even my father is with me. Maybe because my house is within 3km radius of the Markaz, they have been calling me, thinking that I am from Nagpur and may have visited the locality during a visit to Delhi.”

Kunal Poratkar, an engineer living in Hudkeshwar area of the city, who had been to Manali via Delhi too has been quarantined at MLA Hostel. He does not have any complaint about the conditions at the facility, or the behaviour of officials, however, Poratkar stresses that he was not even close to Nizamuddin area during his visit to Delhi.

“I was in Delhi on March 8, and headed for Manali. On the way back, I was in Delhi on March 16. Of course, I visited areas like Dwarka, AIIMS and Preet Vihar to meet relatives, but not Nizamuddin or the Markaz. Even the driver who took us to Manali was from Chandigarh,” he says.

TOI called random people whom the civic authorities had contacted during the drive to scan persons who attended the Tablighi Jamaat event at Delhi. As the names had been identified by tracking phone calls, the list of 60 odd persons was not religion specific.

Even some Muslims, who had been to Delhi but not the Markaz event, have been called and quarantined. All of the 15 persons contacted by TOI at random claimed they were not at the Markaz event. A number of them had, however, boarded the train back from Nizamuddin railway station or alighted there.

Three of them, including the lawyer mentioned above, no longer live in Nagpur but are continuing to use the phone number they had got in the city. Ten of them claimed that over 14 days had passed since their return, and they had suffered no symptoms. One of them was, in fact, back home after 24 hours in quarantine as his test result came back negative.

Those quarantined also alleged that they were kept in the dark. They claimed the officials told them they will have to stay for only 24 hours, but on reaching there they were told the stay may last for 14 days.

“I came back by flight and there is no question of visiting the Tablighi Jamaat as I am from a different sect. I had been to Himachal Pradesh for a vacation,” said Sheikh Mohammed Taufique, who has been quarantined. “They should not have lied. If I have to stay here for 14 days I could have come prepared. But they said it’s going to be for 24 hours only,” he said.

An annoyed Rohit Hareram said he has shifted from Nagpur to Delhi. Originally from Bihar, Hareram stays at Badarpur, far away from Nizamuddin. Manish Kumar, a tailor, who was also contacted, has also left Nagpur two years ago and now lives in Noida, again far away from Nizamuddin, he said.

Tanveer Ashraf, a resident of Mominpura, said he had been for a pilgrimage to shrines in Etawah and Bareilly, and had only caught the train back to Nagpur from Nizamuddin railway station. “Usually I visit Nizamuddin Auliya shrine, which is different from the Tablighi Jamaat. This time I did not even go there and only visited Hotel Al Kareem near Jama Masjid to have lunch and came back,” he said.

Ghulam Ashraf and five others from Nagpur said they had been to the Sufi saint Moinuddin Chisti’s shrine at Ajmer, and had only made a stopover at Delhi, but in different localities.

Shravan Varma said he was stranded at Dehradun, where he had gone for his son’s interview at the Indian Air Force selection board. They had gone via Delhi.

Raunaq Gupta, who got a call day before yesterday, said he is back from quarantine facility after 24 hours on testing negative. He claims to have gone to Karol Bagh only, and not Nizamuddin.


