Tablighis tested, jack up Covid-19 cases in Telangana, Andhra Pradesh
2020-04-01
HYDERABAD/ VIJAYAWADA: Coronavirus positive cases in Telangana and Andhra Pradesh saw a sharp spike on Tuesday with the two state governments aggressively tracking down all those who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat meet in Delhi in mid-March. 

While Andhra Pradesh reported 21 fresh cases taking the overall tally to 44, Telangana's tally jumped by 15 to 97. This is the highest number of positive cases recorded in a single day in the two states thus far and all of them had either attended the meet in Delhi or were relatives of those who had returned from the meet.

According to the Jamaat sources, 746 people from Andhra Pradesh and 1,030 from Telangana attended the congregation at the century-old Markaz. Most of those who attended the meeting from the two Telugu states have been traced and kept under isolation, while about 300 are yet to be contacted. Some of them are in Delhi and could not reach their homes after the sudden lockdown.

Besides reaching out to Tablighi members, mosques in both states asked Jamaat members to voluntarily report at government hospitals if they had attended the Delhi meet. Mohammed Ilyas Rizvi, principal secretary, minorities welfare, AP said, "They can also inform on helpline 104 immediately in their own interest as well in the best interest of society to stop the spread of the virus."

Telangana health minister Eatala Rajendar too appealed to the people who had gone to Delhi for prayers to get tested in government-run Gandhi Hospital. Sources said about 300 samples have so far been tested in Telangana and more clarity would emerge on the numbers after further tests on Wednesday.

The two governments have also tracked down many of the contacts of those who had returned from Delhi and asked them to go into home quarantine.

Disinfection drive taken up near patient’s home, locality

In Andhra Pradesh, the initial hint of the Old Delhi connection to the spread of the disease came when a 52-year-old tobacco businessman from Guntur district tested positive for the virus on March 24, followed by several other cases.

Two other patients from Anantapur district of Andhra Pradesh are close contacts of a Karnataka man, who had returned from Mecca. One of the cases is from Peddapuram in East Godavari district.

He also has a travel history to Mecca, before the Saudi government stopped issuance of visas for pilgrims to the country. East Godavari district medical and health officer Dr Satya Suseela told TOI that medical authorities sent the 18 family members, relatives and neighbours of the Peddapuram patient to an isolation ward on Tuesday.

In addition to this, they also carried out disinfection activities in the vicinity of the patient’s house.

“Nearly 100 close contacts of the two patients from Kakinada and Rajahmundry, who tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday after attending the religious meeting in Delhi, were admitted to hospital. We have been tracing other contacts of the patients,” said Dr Suseela.

Telangana on Tuesday had highest number of Corona cases in single day with a total of 15 people testing positive.

These are the people or their family members who went to Delhi for prayers in Marqaz Nizamuddin mosque With this, total number of cases have gone to 97 in Telangana. Till now 14 people are discharged from the hospitals and six deaths are reported in the state. Four of the victims had gone for the prayer meet in Delhi.

