Take over private hospitals to fight Covid-19: NGO writes to CM
2020-05-08
Bhopal: ‘Madhya Pradesh government should enforce rules to ensure that private doctors resume their duties with immediate effect and on the lines of Andhra Pradesh, MP government should take over private hospitals. Nationalisation of hospital would reduce strained by shortage of hospital beds, doctors,’ stated NGO Jan Swasth Abhiyan (JSA) in a letter to CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan.JSA also pointed out that Maharashtra government has taken measures, wherein private doctors have been directed to report on duty else their licence will be revoked. A top DME official, when contacted, did not comment on the matter. A representative of the NGO, Amulya Nidhi has cited failure of private medical college, RDGMC in Ujjain and demanded its takeover by the government. After the situation got out of control in the district, MoHFW appointed AIIMS Bhopal to mentor Ujjain district and private medical college for improving the situation. About 20 per cent complaints on COVID-19 helpline are related to medical issues. One of the worst-hit districts, Ujjain, with just 7 lakh population has death rate of 21 per cent with death toll rising every day. The death rate in Dewas is 27 per cent and in Khandwa, it is 12 per cent.“Health is a state subject. Madhya Pradesh Clinical Establishments (Registration & Regulation) Bill, 2019, gives the government leverage to take action. Outside the urban areas, health services related to COVID-19 need to be improved immediately,” said Nidhi. The NGO has a number of public health experts. He said that most of the deaths in city like Indore have taken place in private establishments.State government has identified a number of the private hospitals and medical colleges for COVID-19 care. However, the bulk of patients getting treatment and those critically ill are in government-run hospitals. The alarming aspect in the state is that COVID-19 has now spread to 35 out of 55 districts; the infection has spread in 9 new districts in just last 10 days, he added.