Take care of your vehicles during lockdown: Experts
2020-04-21
PATNA: Private vehicles are mostly not being used during the lockdown period. However, experts say the vehicles, be it a four-wheeler or a two-wheeler, need care or else they might create problems in ignition after a long period of time and when movement is allowed from May 4.

According to experts, battery of a vehicle is the most vulnerable part when it is not used for several days. Some of the vehicle manufacturing firms are now sending SMSs to owners mentioning about the dos and don’t to be followed amid the present scenario. Additional guidelines are being sent for hybrid vehicles.

Satyendra Kumar Singh, manager of a South Korean four-wheeler firm’s showroom in Patna, told TOI that protecting battery from getting drained is the most important thing a vehicle owner needs to do. “The four-wheeler engine should be started and run for at least ten minutes every day, if possible. If not, then it can be done every alternate day to keep the battery charged and in good condition,” he said.

Singh said one must not press accelerator after starting the engine after a long time as it might result in internal damages. “Avoid accelerator as lubricant is settled at the lowest level from everywhere inside the engine and sudden acceleration can cause internal wear and tear,” he said. 

Singh said keeping a vehicle clean and sanitised is also important in the present circumstances as it is touched by several persons. He said his company is ready to provide doorstep service to its customers if allowed by the government and situation normalizes.

Rakesh Ranjan, manager of another four-wheeler showroom in Patliputra Colony, said running the engine in idle condition for ten minutes is enough. “Engine compartment must be kept clean. Such steps also help in keeping rodents away. No other steps are required for modern diesel or petrol vehicles when they remain shut for several days. Hybrid vehicles also require the same steps to be taken for keeping them in good condition,” he said.


