Coronavirus in Delhi: Price of masks jacked up in city
2020-03-04
NEW DELHI: The fear of Covid-19 spreading in the city has led to an unusual crisis — shortage of masks and hand sanitisers in medical stores across the city.

With supplies from China hit by the coronavirus outbreak, pharmacies said they are left with locally manufactured products mostly.

“There aren’t enough masks in the market. If you want to buy one, you can take it or leave it,” shopkeepers are telling customers who protest at the high prices.

The surgical masks usually sold for Rs 10 in the retail market are currently being sold at Rs 40. The N95 masks that have multiple layers for better protection and re-use are being sold for anything between Rs 150 and Rs 500. “We are also paying extra to purchase the masks from suppliers,” said a shopkeeper, justifying the increased price.

Online portals selling the masks and hand sanitisers said the demand for face masks, particulate respiratory masks, protective suits, sterile surgical gloves and safety goggles has gone up 10 times.

Every time a patient coughs or sneezes, the droplets containing the virus are released and they tend to spread. Masks are advised for people who have symptoms such as coughing and sneezing so they don’t spread the virus causing the symptoms to others. However, healthier individuals also use it to avoid getting the infection, especially when visiting crowded areas such as hospitals or airports.

Such is the crisis of masks that even health workers in hospitals are finding it difficult to get it. Resident doctors at Safdarjung Hospital, one of the nodal centres for quarantining and treatment of Covid-19 cases, have asked the authorities to ensure masks for all healthcare workers. “Healthcare workers are at maximum risk to catch the infection because they are directly in touch with patients. They need to be provided with all possible protective equipment to be able to work without fear or anxiety,” said a doctor.

The spread of COVID19 has also increased the potential of drug crisis. To contain this, India, the world’s largest maker of generic drugs, on Tuesday restricted the export of common medicines such as paracetamol and 25 other pharmaceutical ingredients and drugs made from them.

Though India is a source of about 20% of the world’s generic drug supply, pharma companies in the country are dependent on China for two-thirds of the chemical components needed to make them.

The outbreak of coronavirus has shut factories in China and impacted supplies, leading to fears of a shortage of drugs and medicines.


