Tamil Nadu: ‘We are ready for rapid Covid-19 tests, numbers will soon be down’
2020-04-05
As Tamil Nadu geared up for a tough phase of dealing with the Covid-19 pandemic, health minister C Vijayabaskar says the state had ordered one lakh rapid test kits that will help public health authorities screen hot spots. “We will be ready before the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) releases its final advisory on the use of rapid test kits,” he tells TOI. Excerpts from the interview by Pushpa Narayan & Jaya Menon


Experts say the peak is yet to begin. How will TN handle it?

Besides setting aside beds in government hospitals, declaring some as exclusive Covid-19 facilities, we are talking to private hospitals and medical colleges. Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research in Porur has promised to allot 1,500 beds, Saveetha Medical College and MIOT have promised 500.


Do not have enough testing kits?

We have placed orders for one lakh rapid test kits. They will arrive on April 10 and will be used in several hot spots. In a week, ICMR will come out with an advisory on using these kits. We will be ready by then. The test used now, called PCR (polymerase chain reaction) test, uses a nasal or throat swab for screening. The results take five hours. The rapid test uses a blood sample and gives results based on detecting certain antibodies that react with the coronavirus protein.

Tamil Nadu is accused of not testing enough people when asymptomatic people can be spreading the disease.

Testing is being done as per ICMR protocol. Of the 170 testing centres across India, we have 17. This includes 11 in the government sector. We will add 10 more this week. People with travel history, contacts with people with travel history who tested positive, people hospitalised with severe acute respiratory infections are all being tested.


Are you interacting with medical experts abroad?

We have been interacting with the Centre for Disease Control in Atlanta, World Health Organisation, World Bank, Japan International Cooperation Agency and several senior physicians, virologists and infectious diseases experts. We have discussed the guidelines for testing, isolation, treatment and contract tracing methodologies given by ICMR which has reassured us that we are on the right path.


What are the lessons from such interactions?

We learned the success and failure paths from countries. For instance, we realised that lockdown wasn’t effective in the UK. They continued to have incoming flights from Italy. We decided not to follow their herd immunity theory. We realised that our lockdown has to push back the virus. We also learned to disinfect areas, like China did.


Is the health department working with medical colleges and experts within the state?

Yes. We are collaborating with the Christian Medical College in Vellore to isolate the strain of the virus. We want to study if there is a mutation.


Why are we seeing a lot of cases during the lockdown?

Because it is a cluster. We tracked every (Tablighi Jamaat) member who attended the conference (in Delhi last month), isolated and tested them. We have launched a micro containment plan and screenings show no community spread. We expect the numbers to come down soon.


How will you ensure private hospitals don’t jack up bills of patients?

Up to 70% of the population is covered by some form of government insurance. Most of them have cashless cards where no additional payment is required. Many others who work in corporates have group medical insurance. For the small percentage of people who don’t have any insurance, treatment is free at all government hospitals.


You have declared it as a disaster. Do you have adequate funds to handle the situation?

The state released ₹60 crore initially. The CM announced ₹500 crore relief in the assembly. Now we have ₹3,200 crore. The CM is monitoring the contingency measures.

