Tamil Nadu hopes extended lockdown will have some relaxations
2020-04-13
With several states preferring an extension, the country-wide lockdown is likely to be extended up to April 30. But Tamil Nadu is hoping that the extension will come with relaxations, with permission for certain industrial segments to resume operations under strict norms. 

"The task force and other teams came up with suggestions. These included permitting certain industrial segments, especially manufacturing, to resume operations. The suggestions are under consideration of the state," a source told TOI.

"We are waiting for the Centre's directive. It is expected to come Monday or Tuesday. Our expectations are that the lockdown will be extended, but with some relaxations to permit resumption of operations in certain categories of industries," an official said.

"Whatever decisions Centre takes, physical distancing and wearing masks are going to be the new norm worldwide for at least the next six months," the official said.

According to sources, suggestions have been put forth to the government by both construction companies as well as some manufacturing units, which not only house their guest workers, but also provide them with food. "They can be permitted to work in our sites, especially since they already placed under a certain kind of quarantine regime and will be transported in company vehicles," a source said.

Accommodating the large number of guest workers is creating fissures among local populace in certain places, including Chennai. “There was even a suggestion from the task force to seek relaxations for two days and request the Centre for special trains to permit those guest workers, keen to return to their home state, to travel. But implementing such a suggestion not only comes with a set of problems and the Centre may not approve it,” a source said.

“Genuinely a humanitarian problem is there. Also, the government is aware of the issues. This is a public health issue. There is a medical committee, there is WHO and Government of India’s public health guidelines. We cannot independently implement any idea of our own,” said a senior official.

Tamil Nadu is also gearing up to classify various districts into red, yellow and green categories, based on which relaxations, if part of Centre’s directive, can be implemented. About 17 districts including Chennai and Coimbatore are to be categorized red zones, with another 17 to be classified as orange and yellow and the rest as green. Official sources, however, did not confirm such categorization of districts.



