Tamil Nadu suffered Rs 35,000 crore loss due to lockdown: CM Edappadi K Palaniswami
2020-05-24
SALEM: Tamil Nadu has suffered an estimated Rs 35,000 crore GST revenue loss during the ongoing lockdown period, said chief minister Edappadi K Palaniswami. 


Speaking to reporters, the chief minister said the government has been taking various austerity measures to tide over the crisis. However, development schemes won't be affected from these steps, he said.

During the last week of March, besides April and the lockdown, the state has suffered an estimated Rs 35,000 crore GST revenue loss, he said quoting the Finance Department. A total of 3.85 lakh people has been tested across the state for Covid-19 till date, he said. He said 14,853 people tested positive in the state and of them 7, 524 were getting treatment at government hospitals .

The CM came to Salem as part of his two-day tour on Friday evening. He chaired a meeting with the district administration officials at the collectorate on Saturday. Palaniswami said the state has 67 testing centers, including 27 private, which is highest in the country when compared with other states. "The health department is testing nearly 13,000 people arriving from other states daily," he said. The CM gave permission to almost all the industries and factories to run across the state. He assured that there will not be any issues for agricultural related activities and farmers could function as usual in the state.He said the central government has not allotted the amount demanded by the state government. 

"At the same time, they were allotting in a phase manner," he said. He refused to answer to a question whether lockdown would be extended . He said he will take a decision based on the central government's decision. Palaniswami said Class 10 board examinations will be conducted as per central government's directions from June 15. "All the facilities will be provided to students," he said, adding that, academic year will be started only after the board results are out.


