Tamil Nadu: Ex-rally champion goes the extra mile to fight Covid-19
2020-04-03
Having excelled in a sport where quick thinking and reaction time are crucial, former national rally champion Vikram Mathias has put his sporting instincts to good use when the nation is battling Coronavirus. The 44-year-old, who lives with his wife Anushri and their two children in Bokkapuram, a hamlet on the foothills of the Nilgiris near Masinagudi, made sanitizers and distributed them among forest guards and policemen.



It all started on March 23, the eve of the country-wide lockdown. Mathias was heading to Ooty to buy essentials and asked some police personnel if they needed anything. Their unanimous reply was sanitizer. “One of the police officers pointed out that they meet a lot of people throughout the day and there was a shortage of sanitizers. In Ooty, with great difficulty, I managed to buy two small bottles. While we were worried about going into depression and claustrophobia, the officials were out in the open all day, meeting hundreds of people,” Mathias told TOI.


At a time when sanitizers are in high demand and short in supply, Mathias swung into action, deciding to make them at home for forest guards, police and other officials who man the Tamil Nadu-Karnataka border. He has already made 10 litres of an WHO-compliant sanitizer so far and distributed it. He is planning to manufacture more.

“I researched online and found that WHO had put out the formula to prepare hand sanitisers. I needed three ingredients -- isopropyl alcohol, hydrogen peroxide and glycerol. I got down to calling our friends who have hospitals, clinics and pharmacies in the state asking them how to source the ingredients. In Coimbatore I managed to source all three ingredients,” Mathias said.

As the lockdown was in place, police helped Mathias with the transportation of the ingredients. It took him a day to understand the process. The family used old shampoo, hand wash and sanitizer bottles to pour the product into. They also printed labels with the ingredients. “We had 10 litres of sanitizer. I met police officials and with them went to three check posts along the Mudumalai-Bandipur border and distributed it,” Mathias

