Tannery in Trichy sealed for operating during lockdown
2020-04-02
TRICHY: The district administration sealed a tannery in Gundur on Wednesday for operating it defying the lockdown announced by the government. In a related development, Trichy corporation is to lodge a police complaint against another tannery unit in Sembattu that was functioning despite repeated warning to shut down operations.


There are presently five tanneries in the city, two in Sembattu and one in Gundur. All these have to send their effluent to the common treatment plant located at Tiruvalarchipatti village on the Pudukkottai road.

Shanmuga Prime Tannery at Gundur was sealed on Wednesday after officials found it operating with over a dozen workers. The unit was processing raw skin to produce finished leather. However, raw skin needs to undergo processing at various stages.

Starting from soaking, the skin is put through pit liming process where it is soaked in alkaline solution for over a week after unhairing. This is followed by pickling after which it undergoes tanning to make the end product.

In the case of Shanmuga Prime, the skin was under pit liming process when Janata Curfew was announced followed by the nationwide lockdown. During pit liming, the leather needs to be taken out of the pit for a while to prevent it from decaying.

“Shanmuga Prime was engaging workers to take out the leather to prevent it from decaying by engaging workers because of which it had to face the ire of the district administration,” said the president of Trichy Tanneries Association Mohamed Adam.

Confessing that the tannery unit should have obtained permission from the concerned authorities before carrying out any activity, Adam said that sealing the unit would be too harsh a punishment as the unit was only trying to prevent its leather under processing from decaying.

Shanmuga Tannery wasn’t the only unit that to face the ire of authorities. The corporation officials are planning to lodge a police complaint against Bestan leather company operating from Sembattu. It was functioning despite repeated warning to shut down considering the section 144 imposed under CrPC.

“The unit was accused of letting the effluent on the neighbouring vacant land and TNPCB officials are refusing to to act against it though it has been operating throwing norms to the wind,” said a complainant.

A senior Trichy corporation official confirmed that the tannery was operating despite strict instructions to keep all operations under wrap during the lockdown period.

A Sajith Ibrahim of Bestan leather company told TOI that he was only doing basic handling of about 20,000 leather pieces under process by taking the leather outside for a while to prevent it from decaying.

Asked on the complaints of discharging effluent to nearby vacant land, Sajith rejected the charges. He claimed that waste from his unit was reaching CETP and TNPCB officials are keeping a watch on it.

On the civic body’s plan to lodge a complaint against the unit, he said police and civic body officials had carried out inspection in the unit and he had explained his point to them.

