Andhra Pradesh: Taste for seafood dips amidst coronavirus fears
2020-03-14
VISAKHAPATNAM: The rise in number of coronavirus cases has led to a drastic fall in the sale of marine fish in Andhra Pradesh. According to an estimate by fishermen’s associations in the state, sales have decreased by at least 30 per cent in the last couple of months.


“Just like chicken there’s a lot of misconception over consumption of fish. People are apprehensive they might get affected if they consume fish. Sale of fish has reduced drastically,” said Arijili Dasu, executive director of Fisherfolk Foundation, a community-based fishermen’s association in the city.

Every year, Andhra Pradesh exports in bulk a portion of its marine catch to Odisha, Chhattisgarh and Karnataka, and even parts of Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Maharashtra.

Since January, wholesalers supplying fish to neighbouring states have been reluctant to place bulk orders. At local markets across the state, wholesalers have reduced the number of orders.

“Our estimate suggests that sale of marine fishes has dipped by at least 30 per cent and soon it will have an immense impact on the livelihood of the fishermen,” added Dasu.

Andhra Pradesh has around 3,55,000 fishermen, of which around 75,000 are deep sea fishermen.

Amidst fears surrounding the consumption of fish, fishermen added that the lack of storage facilities is compounding their problems. Apart from the fishing harbour in Visakhapatnam, no other fishing centre in the state has storage facilities.

“If we cannot sell fish in bulk it becomes very difficult for us to keep the fish fresh. Many of us have stopped venturing out into the sea. Even if we are going to the sea our catch is lower than our usual catch,” said S Buliya, a fisherman. 

Fishermen’s associations who were planning to organise awareness camps for wholesalers and customers have now had to postpone their plans in view of the upcoming elections to local bodies in the state.

“This is not the right time to organise such awareness programmes. People are busy with the election. We would wait till the dates of poll results and considering the situation then we would decide on the awareness camps,” said Dasu. 

