Tata to upgrade 2 government hospitals in state for Covid treatment
2020-05-15
MUMBAI: Tata group has begun the process of upgrading two government hospitals in Maharashtra into Covid-19 treatment centres to assist the authorities in fighting the virus.


The conglomerate is upgrading a 50-bed hospital in Sangli and a 106-bed healthcare facility in Buldhana with plans to hand these over by June 15. The facilities, which will include in-patient and out-patient wings, will be permanent units for the area’s healthcare even after the pandemic is over. Other than the two hospitals, the group, through Tata Projects, is in the midst of setting up five healthcare facilities in Mumbai.

The conglomerate, including controlling shareholder Tata Trusts, had pledged Rs 1,500 crore to combat coronavirus that has impacted lives and businesses. The hospitals in Sangli and Buldhana will be armed with critical care capabilities, minor operation theatres, basic pathology and radiology, facilities for dialysis and blood storage and telemedicine units, said Tata Trusts in a statement.

In Mumbai, the group has transformed KEM Hospital’s two wards with 65 beds and has turned its orthopaedic centre into a 115-bed isolation centre. It has completed a 100-bed facility at St George hospital. It is also finishing a 70-bed and a 300-bed facilities at HBT Trauma Center in Jogeshwari and Seven Hills Hospital in Marol; and is setting up a 75-bed ICU cum isolation facility at Tata Memorial Centre in Kharghar. Elsewhere in the country, the Tata group is upgrading/setting up healthcare facilities in Uttar Pradesh, Kerala, Bengaluru and Noida.

The conglomerate is upgrading a 168-bed healthcare centre in Gautam Buddha Nagar and a 106-bed facility in Gonda, both state-run units located in Uttar Pradesh, into Covid-19 treatment centres. It is constructing a 500-bed Covid-19 hospital in Kasaragod, Kerala, which reported 26 fresh infections on Thursday. It has commenced work in setting up a 200-bed quarantine facility at TCS’s premises in Noida. This is expected to be completed by June-end. It has developed facilities for 288 general ward beds, 36 ICU beds and 36 private ward beds at Rudrapur Medical College in Uttarakhand besides setting up a 20-bed facility at Sir CV Raman General Hospital in Bengaluru. 

These moves follow Tata Trusts chairman Ratan Tata’s statement that “urgent emergency resources need to be deployed to cope with the needs of fighting the Covid-19 crisis, which is one of the toughest challenges the human race will face”.

