Tata hosp is first pvt Covid testing centre in state
2020-04-30
Jamshedpur: Tata Main Hospital (TMH), Jamshedpur, has been certified by the Indian Council of Medical Research for Covid diagnostic testing and has become the first private laboratory in Jharkhand to receive the approval. TMH has the capacity to test 50 samples per day. Until now now, swab samples in Jamshedpur could only be tested in the state-run Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Medical College and Hospital (MGMMCH).

Tata Steel general manager (medical services) Ranjan Chaudhury on Wednesday said, “We are pleased that TMH has received the approval and has been included in the list of private laboratories that can conduct Covid-19 tests.” He added that testing is critical in assessing the spread of Covid-19 and will help contain its spread in the region.

TMH has also set up a 650-bed Covid unit, including 513 isolation beds and 77 critical care beds with invasive and non-invasive ventilation support. The hospital has also set-up a Covid-19 screening room with a provision for booking appointments online, a special Covid-19 maternity ward and a labour room complex for pregnant women with coronavirus symptoms.

Responding to the request of chief minister Hemant Soren, Tata Sons has sent medical equipment and consumables to the state. This includes 50,000 three-ply masks, 25,000 pairs of nitrile gloves and 10,000 Covid-19 testing kits. “We are committed to support the government in tackling this pandemic,” Ranjan said.

Meanwhile, with two testing machines functional at MGMMCH from April 15, the hospital can now test over 100 virus samples a day. “Previously, with only one diagnostic machine at our disposal, we could only test about 80 samples per day. But now with the installation of the second machine, the total number of tests per day has doubled,” said MGMMCH principal Prashant Kumar Barla.

Barla added that the swab samples that arrive for a Covid-19 test varies from 10 to 60 per day. “We have requested for a third testing machine from the government, which will further strengthen our fight against coronavirus,” he said.

Meanwhile, the Indian Medical Association (IMA) has asked the government to increase the medical and para-medical staff strength at MGMMCH. “At such a crucial time, MGMMMCH requires an increase in its staff strength, including doctors, medical staff and para-medical staff, which will give a boost to its fight against the pandemic,” IMA secretary (Jamshedpur) Mrityunjay Singh said.


