West Bengal: Taxi driver offers hospital as quarantine unit
2020-04-10
KOLKATA: Taxi driver Md Saidul Laskar and his wife Shamima who set up a 55-bed hospital — ‘Marufa Memorial Hospital’ — at Punri village in Baruipur, South 24 Parganas, nearly 40 kilometres from Kolkata, have offered to the state government the two-storied building for a quarantine centre for Covid-19 patients. The hospital was built in memory of Saidul’s sister Marufa Khatoon.


The BDO and five other officials surveyed the hospital and sent the proposal to the state health department for approval.



“Recently when I went to the Block Development Officer to donate Rs 5,000 to the chief minister’s relief fund, I offered the hospital for Covid-19 patients. On Wednesday, they surveyed the facility and sent the proposal to the state health department,” Saidul said. “We have the basic facilities and around 15 staffers. They said that they would make all the necessary additional arrangements,” Saidul added.

“The building is in good condition and the ambience is great. But we need to make some changes. The top floor is not ready yet. Once the approval comes, we shall start working on it so that it can be transformed into a quarantine centre as soon as possible. The second floor needs some work and we shall have to make temporary arrangements so that we can keep patients there,” a senior district administrative official said.

This is not the first time that Saidul and his wife have come forward for a social cause. Saidul lost his only sister Marufa in 2004 because he couldn’t provide for her basic treatment as the nearest hospital was 25 kilometres away from his home. Since then, Saidul and his wife have been fighting against all odds to provide treatment to people of nearly 100 villages in and around Punri. Saidul sold his three taxis and his wife gave all her ornaments to buy the land in 2008. They saved every paisa to develop the hospital. The hospital houses an Outdoor Patient Department (OPD) where more than 300 patients are given free consultation and medicine daily.

“We need to purchase a lot a medical equipment before we can start operating a full-fledged hospital. But that’s not my priority. Our state is going through a tremendous crisis and in this situation if we can help the government I shall consider myself fortunate,” Saidul said.


