TB control staff takes up Covid-19 challenge
2020-06-11
Lucknow: The expertise and experience of staff engaged in the revised national TB control programme came in handy for the state health department in the crusade against Covid-19.

The office and field staff has been tracking and tracing suspected Coronavirus cases, drawing their samples and transporting them for testing, besides working in the state helpline for surveillance and counselling.

“Over 80% of the 3,000-odd staff was instantly taken for Covid-19 control and each one of them has worked diligently till now,” said state TB officer Dr Santosh Gupta. “From lab technicians to supervisors, counsellor to visitors and even district leads, including district programme officers have contributed for the cause,” he added.

Experts believe that several reasons accounted for deployment of TB staff in Coronavirus containment. The advantage with TB staff is that they are trained to collect and handle samples which made them point persons for a number of lab related activities.

A practical reason was that the TB programme staff members have vehicles which were used for transportation of coronavirus samples from districts to labs. Then, they follow up patients and are used to tracking people regularly — a trait much needed to build the line list of suspected cases in a cluster.

Also, many of them are in the business of persuasion to ensure that patients do not miss their medicines despite side effects. This skill was used at the call centre while handling anxious or depressed persons during the lockdown.

“It is because of their prior experience that negligible health staff contracted the infection in the process of collecting samples,” said Dr Santosh.

Many of them shouldered double responsibility during the lockdown period. “The primary responsibility — TB control programme — did suffer during lockdown as the OPDs remained closed. But then the task was to ensure that the existing patients did not drop out. So, many in the TB team were twinning between Covid and TB duties,” said CMO of a red district.


