TB diagnosis machines for Covid-19 tests in all districts soon
2020-05-08
Ranchi: With migrants arriving to Jharkhand thick and fast, the state government on Wednesday said it is working to install Covid-19 testing machines in each district. 

Principal secretary of the state health medical education and family welfare department, Nitin Madan Kulkarni, said the government has placed orders for procuring Trunet machines from the Centre for installing them in the districts. Trunet machines are used for testing tuberculosis. Recently, the ICMR approved the use of Trunet machines for Covid-19 testing. 

“With migrants returning and many of them from red zones, we need to ramp up our testing. Trunets are imported machines and their procurement takes time. However, we are hopeful of getting eight such machines by next week,” Kulkarni said. 

With number of positive cases standing at 125 till evening, Kulkarni said the government has identified 46 containment zones which encompasses 72,000 households. “Over 8,000 samples have been collected so far from these zones,” he added. 

Stating that Jharkhand’s mortality rate was less than that of the national average, Kulkarni said less than 1% of the total persons tested positive for Covid-19 in Jharkhand so far. He also claimed that community transmission has not occurred in Jharkhand so far. 

Talking tough on the matter of pregnant women being turned back from hospitals, Kulkarni said the department has issued instructions to all districts to put necessary measures in place for the 52,000-odd pregnant women who are scheduled for delivery this month. “All institutions have been asked to screen them for Covid-19 in advance,” he added. 

Kulkarni said government and private health providers have been asked to resume their services to treat patients suffering from other ailments. “The guidelines kept hospitals and labs out of the purview of lockdown. However, we received reports of many of them turning patients away. This will not be tolerated at any cost. All deputy commissioners and IMA have been asked to ensure they are functional,” he added. 


