Tuberculosis machines modified for Covid-19 tests in Bihar
2020-04-11
PATNA: The state health department will use tuberculosis (TB) testing machines with certain modifications to speed up sample testing for Covid-19. Lab technicians will be trained for that from Saturday, state health department additional secretary Kaushal Kishor said on Friday.


Presently, test for TB is done at Darbhanga Medical College and Hospital, Jawahar Lal Nehru Medical College and Hospital (JLNMCH) at Bhagalpur, Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences and Tuberculosis Demonstration and Training Centre in Patna.

“TB machines can be used for testing RNA, provided we add a testing kit (cartridge) to it. We have asked Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) to supply us those kits and tentatively we will begin testing for Covid-19 at these centres in a week,” Kishor said. He said the process will be slightly different from reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RTPCR).

The state health department had even asked ICMR to permit them to carry out Covid-19 test at Anugrah Narayan Magadh Medical College and Hospital at Gaya, Sri Krishna Medical College and Hospital at Muzaffarpur, JLNMCH at Bhagalpur and AIIMS-Patna.

When asked whether the department was planning to rope in private labs and hospitals also, Kishor said, “Private entities here do not fulfil the criteria set by ICMR, which includes National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories accreditation.”

Presently, Covid-19 test is being conducted in Bihar at Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical Sciences (RMRI), IGIMS), DMCH and Patna Medical College and Hospital.

Meanwhile, principal secretary (health) Sanjay Kumar said total 5,457 Covid-19 tests had been conducted in the state till Friday morning. Of them, 4145 tests had been done at RMRI, 930 at IGIMS, 233 at DMCH and 149 at PMCH.

Relief for thalassemia patients: State Health Society has asked people, especially those suffering from thalassemia, to dial the toll-free number 102 to inform about blood shortage and their requirement. As per the press release shared by SHS, the government has a stock of 2700 units of blood in its blood banks and have asked needy people to get in touch with them.

