KGMU begins use of TB diagnostic machine for Covid-19 testing
2020-04-24
LUCKNOW:Giving a boost to the fight against global pandemic Covid-19 in UP, the King George’s Medical University began the use of CB NAAT – the diagnostic machines used to test drug-resistant tuberculosis (TB) -- for conducting Covid-19 tests.


Use of CB NAAT (or Cartridge Based Nucleic Acid Amplification Test) is part of ICMR’s larger plan to have options for testing when the pandemic peaks in India. A decision in this regard was taken in the first week of April by an empowered group constituted by the home ministry for planning and ensuring implementation of Covid-19 response activities. ICMR also issued a detailed guidelines for the same on April 19.

 

According to a union ministry official, “the availability of experts and machines so far used for TB will increase the testing capacity in the country. This needs tweaking the cartridge based NAAT for which kits were ordered and sent to probable centres. This can increase Covid-19 testing capacity by 5,000-6,000 per day.”

Head of Microbiology department, KGMU, Prof Amita Jain said: “following recommendations from ICMR, we have begun the work. It is a new thing and it will take some time to prove the utility of the machine in terms of SARS-CoV-2 (the official name of coronavirus).”

Chairman, UP State Task Force for Revised National Tuberculosis Control Programme and head of pulmonary medicine department, KGMU, Prof Suryakant said, “if the worth is proven, CB NAAT will really ramp up testing in UP.”

He added that the biggest advantage of CB NAAT is that it can be used by even as class XII pass individual after a two hour long training. But since the state has 141 such machines with at least one in every district headquarters, the staff is also in place.

“We just need to train the staff to speed up the work. Also, since both CB NAAT and SARSCoV2 require the same level of bio-safety standards, investments in this directions may not be needed. The authorities will however need to provide the testing reagents and cartridges,” he said.

He also said that depending on CB NAAT was better than relying on the rapid tests. “Like Elisa test, the CB NAAT extracts the genetic material of the virus through the polymerase chain reaction. The rapid tests, on the other hand are dependent on development of antibodies in the human body. The test looks for two antibodies – immunoglobulin M (IGM) and immunoglobulin G (IGG) – which take seven and 14 days to surface in the blood. So the chances of missing out on detection are high in rapid test.”

