Teach people on Covid, dispel myths: MKU VC
2020-05-12
Madurai: Students should play an active role in educating people on Covid-19 and dispel myths associated with it, urged M Krishnan, vice-chancellor of Madurai Kamaraj University (MKU).

He took part in the two-day training programme on ‘Psycho Social Care During Covid-19’ jointly organized by MKU, Mannar Thirumalai Naicker College and MS Chellamuthu Trust and Research Foundation on Monday.

Addressing National Social Service (NSS) students, he said that many are not fully aware of the virus and how it spreads. Government and doctors are there to protect infected people. But, students need to play their part by reaching out to the public and keep them informed. “Educate your parents first, then relatives and then people in your village. We are planning to train 3,000 students and if each one can reach out to 100 people, we can cover more than three lakh people,” Krishnan said.

Madurai MP Su Venkatesan said the whole world is going to through something unprecedented. “It is important to deal with the psychological issues faced by the people at this crisis. Scientific understanding of the issue and ways to deal with it without succumbing to fear is need of the hour,” he said.

He said that some countries and states like Kerala have done well because of people’s cooperation and not just because of the governments alone. “I have been writing to various central government departments including Prime Minister’s Office and finance ministry seeking all possible help to the state and my constituency,” he said Founder of M S Chellamuthu Trust and Research Foundation, Dr C Ramasubramanian said the module for the two-day programme was prepared by experts from Nimhans, Bengaluru. Around 220 students have already been trained from MKU, American College and Lady Doak College. These students will get certification from the university. City police have said that they will make use of the students.

Dr J Sangumani, dean, Madurai Medical College, M Vijayaragavan, secretary and B Manoharan, principal of Mannar Thirumalai Naicker College also took part.


