Teach students social distancing to fight coronavirus, advise global bodies
2020-03-12
NEW DELHI: Premier international bodies — the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), UN Children’s Fund (Unicef) and the World Health Organization (WHO) — have suggested implementation of social-distancing practices in schools to protect children from transmission of the novel coronavirus. 

The suggestions, released on Tuesday, include staggering school hours and cancelling any activity that creates crowded conditions. “When possible, create 1-metre space between children’s desks. Teach (them to) avoid unnecessary touching,” the joint advisory states.

 
 
As per available data, individuals aged 18 years and under are at lesser risk of infection compared with the adults, especially elderly people. The symptoms of Covid-19 among children are usually milder, according the US’ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). “Though severe complications — acute respiratory distress syndrome, septic shock — have been reported, they appear to be uncommon,” CDC says. It, however, stresses on taking preventive measures regardless of the rates of infection among children. Among India’s 60 Covid-19 cases, only one patient is a child, a three-year-old boy from Kerala.

The WHO, Unicef and IFRC guidelines suggest sick students, teachers and other staff should not come to school and regular hand washing with safe water and soap, alcohol rub/hand sanitiser or chlorine solution should be made mandatory. Schools should clean and disinfect the premises at least once daily.

“Schools should promote social distancing — a term applied to certain actions that are taken to slow down the spread of a highly contagious disease, including limiting large group of people coming together,” the guidance states. It calls for schools to established procedures for separating sick students and staff from those are well — without creating stigma — and a process for informing parents or caregivers, and consulting healthcare providers or authorities wherever possible. “In case of absenteeism or temporary school closures, support continued quality education,” the guidelines suggest. Some children may feel stressed about the crisis. Parents have been advised to listen to them and take time to comfort them.

“Education can encourage students to become advocates for disease prevention and control at home, in school, and in their community. Maintaining safe school operations or reopening schools after a closure requires many considerations, but if done well, can promote public health,” say the guidelines. “Safe school guidelines implemented in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone during the outbreak of Ebola virus disease from 2014 to 2016 helped prevent school-based transmissions of the virus,” it points out.

