Covid-19 scare: Team of 1,000 fans out to trace Kanika Kapoor’s footprints in Lucknow
2020-03-22
LUCKNOW: It was just a usual comeback for Bollywood singer Kanika Kapoor to her parents in Lucknow on March 11. The festival of Holi which fell just a day before, however, added much fun to her itinerary. So, as the Baby Doll singer immersed herself in a streak of parties and get-togethers, she forgot her travel history. And the fact that she could be a potential carrier of Covid-19 virus.


On Friday, the news that she has been tested positive for the virus, sent a shockwave not only across Lucknow, where she was socialising for almost a week, but also Kanpur, Delhi, Mumbai and London. As per a conservative estimate, she must have contacted at least 400 persons during social gatherings and persons interactions in Lucknow itself. Health officials identified 68 of them and their samples were sent for testing. Thankfully, 28 of them were found negative. UP health minister Jai Pratap Singh is one of them. But he will remain in self-quarantine for 14 days. Results of the rest 40 are awaited.


Coronavirus in India live updates

Lucknow district and health officials, however, are leaving nothing to chance in tracking down all her possible contacts during her stay. Their bid is to reach out to all who were present in social gatherings attended by Kanika. The enormity of the risk posed by her could be gauged form the fact that 100 teams having 10 members each have been formed to conduct a boots-on-the-ground exercise to reach out to each one who was present at the places Kanika went.

Additional district magistrate Amar Pal Singh, who is supervising these teams, said: “The combing exercise is being done as per union health and family welfare ministry’s standard operating procedure (SOP) on containment of coronavirus. Anyone who disrupts the scanning or doesn’t cooperate with the teams will face police action.”

The teams scanned every household in one kilometre radius of the apartment where Kanika was staying with her family in Mahanagar. “The building has been sealed and movement in the neighbourhood has been heavily restricted. Each of the team comprising health officials and others are going door-to-door with thermal scanners to segregate any possible suspected case,” he said. On Saturday, the team reached out to nearly 22,000 residents in the nearby localities.

The teams would then tap households in the three-kilometer radius. The entire locality is being sanitized with sodium bicarbonate solution for which the markets were closed down on Friday. Of these 100 teams, a few have been sent to the homes of those who hosted the party attended by Kanika.

“The homes of Adil Ahmed and Adesh Seth, who hosted two parties attened by her, have been sanitized. The residents have been told not to move out nor let anyone come in for the next 48 hours,” said an officer helping UP health department to put Kanika’s contact list together.

Another team of experts is scanning video footages and CCTV records of the five star hotel where Kanika stayed between March 14 and 16. A senior police officer also said, they have procured a list of 56 passengers who travelled from Mumbai-Lucknow flight. This comes 36 hours after she tested covid-19 positive.

“There are reports that she dined in hotel’s buffet and also attended several guests in the lobby. She was living there at a time when the South African team was staying in the hotel for the ODI match, which evebtually was cancelled. There is information that Kanika was seen briefly attending a news channel’s annual conclave held at the hotel. Therefore, it is important to scan the CCTV footage and list out those came in contact with her,” said an officer engaged in surveillance.

“She flouted instructions on home isolation despite being a potential case of Covid-19… Instead of staying at home, she went socializing. Now after having tested positive, she has now put everyone who came in contact with her at risk,” said Dr Narendra Agarwal, chief medical officer Lucknow who also lodged an FIR against the Bollywood singer.

In Kanpur too, where Kanika went to meet her maternal grandmother, the DM has ordered sealing of the apartment. Police have been deputed to ensure that no one enters or leaves the building, which houses more than 35 families, for the next 48 hours. Health officials have also alerted Kanika’s kids and caretakers in London. District Magistrate, Kanpur, Brahma Deo Tiwari said: “Almost everyone who could have met Kanika has been traced. The few left are being traced.”

Police commissioner, Lucknow, Sujeet Pandey said that he had got in touch with his counterpart in Mumbai. “We have also written to police commissioner of Mumbai to find out if Kanika was properly screened at the international airport or not. Details of the places where she stayed have also been sought,” he told TOI.


