Team of medics, officials prove vital cog in battle against coronavirus
2020-04-17
Margao: As Goa is inching closer to achieving the distinction of zero positive Covid cases, for the over 200 frontline health workers at the ESI hospital, the facility designated as Covid hospital, it has been a challenging yet satisfying experience. Working behind-the-scenes is the dedicated team of district administration officials and medical experts who successfully prepared the Goa model of Covid-19 treatment and ensured that it worked to the tee. 

While confirmatory tests of the one of the two positive patients being treated in the hospital turned negative on Wednesday for Covid-19, medical sources in the hospital said the remaining patient was also on the path of recovery. 

Ever since the government took over the hospital on March 25, the entire staff has been putting their heart and soul into their task which invariably goes beyond the call of duty. Significantly, several doctors of the ESI hospital which is governed by the labour department, have also been drafted for duty at the Hospicio and the TB hospital in Margao coming under the state directorate of health services (DHS).

The medical team is headed by Dr Edwin Gomes.

Sources said that the initial challenge for the hospital administration was to isolate its patients already admitted for treatment from the Covid facility. “We have also ensured that none of our regular ESI patients faced any hardships owing to the conversion of the ESI hospital into Covid hospital as routine OPDs were kept functional,” the source said.

The district administration, however, did face some teething problems on the logistical front at the hospital. While two hotels in the vicinity were taken over for accommodation of the doctors, however, as the hotel staff weren’t on duty, the authorities faced a torrid time in arranging for meals as well as laundry services for the medical staff. 

Plans were firmly in place to handle the worst case scenario if positive cases multiplied and put a strain on the existing medical infrastructural facilities, sources in the district administration said. 

Prasanna Acharya, in-charge of Covid hospital representing the South Goa district administration, informed TOI about an unique initiative taken up by South Goa collector Ajit Roy for efficient planning and management of Covid-19 crisis using information technology. A software module was developed to assist the hospital administration in monitoring the status of Covid-19 patients. “Fortunately, as the cases didn’t shoot up, we didn’t have to use the module as yet. We had plans to make the module accessible to the public as anyone could get real time status of the cases and prevent any panic kind of situation,” Acharya said. “We had planned in advance. We are prepared for the worst case scenario.”


