Technology comes to aid of those with Parkinson’s during virus lockdown
2020-05-23
Panaji: With lockdown restrictions and social distancing norms in place in the face of the Covid-19 pandemic, Candolim-based Nancy Rasquinha has not been able to take her septuagenarian husband Godfrey to Mapusa to attend the weekly group sessions organised by the Parkinson’s Society Goa.

After two months of living without rehabilitation services, the internet has brought a ray of hope into the couple’s life. They are now attending group sessions online to continue coping with Godfrey’s condition. “The motivation to work out was not there for a while. In his condition, it is very important to workout to keep fit physically and mentally. The online sessions have therefore been helpful,” Nancy said. Various online platforms such as WhatsApp, Google Hangouts and Zoom are being used to continue their group therapy sessions. 

“We have been also sending them videos and home exercises as well as following up with them to ensure that they were doing it correctly,” said Dr Joanne D’souza, coordinator, Parkinson’s Society Goa.

The society was established in 2016 and has five support groups in Mapusa, Panaji, Margao, Vasco and Ponda.Due to the lockdown, many patients have missed their rehabilitative services over the past two months. “It is a difficult time, but this will not stop us from the mission to raise awareness about Parkinson’s and reach out to as many people as possible,” D’Souza said.

Maria Lena Sequeira, a Porvorim resident has been taking her husband Harold for evening walks within the Green Valley, Porvorim to ensure that physical dementia doesn’t set in. At home, they watch the videos and attend online sessions. “The exercise videos keep him mentally going as well. There are also some craft videos and dance sessions on Zoom that are shared which help with the motor sensory activities,” she said.

D’Souza said that depression and anxiety are two of the most common mental health issues seen in persons with Parkinson’s. 

Many caregivers also experience exhaustion and negative feelings, she said.The Parkinson’s society has started free online counselling service for persons with Parkinson’s as well as for caregivers to ensure that they do not feel isolated.

Those seeking help can call 9923288429/ 9987216057 or email on parkinsonsocietygoa@gmail.com.

 In an effort to keep the therapeutic sessions going, a video challenge was initiated by the society earlier this month to motivate the patients to keep exercising. “We also have a talent and volunteer campaign to raise awareness and will be conducting a caregiver session shortly.” D’souza said.-


