Tech platforms help administration manage Covid-19 crisis
2020-04-26
HUBBALLI: With the number of Covid-19 positive cases rising to five in Dharwad district, the administration is making maximum use of social media and technology platforms in its fight against the virus. 

Besides setting up a dedicated helpline, the district administration has kept its Facebook and Twitter accounts alive to communicate to people. It has been posting bulletins on Covid-19 situation providing information about the number of positive cases, hotspots, healthcare facilities, supply of essential commodities and various other related issues. 

Ibrahim Maigur, additional deputy commissioner, who is in charge of 24x7 helpline, said, “We are accepting grievances from citizens through the Facebook page ‘Deputy Commissioner Dharwad’, Twitter account ‘DC_Dharwad’ and website: www.supportdharwad.in. We also have an account on Instagram. We are creating awareness about Covid-19 through these platforms and disseminating all related information. We are also attending to the grievances posted by citizens posted on these accounts,” he said.

This apart, the officials have also formed over a dozen of WhatsApp and Telegram groups to ensure smooth and effective functioning of the machinary in tackling the spread of the virus.

Ganesh Rathod, co-chairman, district social media committee, said Dharwad district has been in the forefront in the usage of technology to fight Covid-19. “When the lockdown was announced, there were many apprehensions among citizens on how to get essential commodities. However, deputy commissioner Deepa Cholan instructed us to supply essential commodities at the doorstep of citizens using WhatsApp. Vendors were initially hesitant to register themselves under this service but now we have a network of 950 vendors and 550 volunteers in the twin cities to ensure home delivery of medicines, groceries, vegetables, milk and other essential commodities. We have also developed a software to attend complaints received on email: helpline.deodharwad@gmail.com,” he informed.

Manjunath Dollin, district information officer, said WhatsApp groups are created based on issues like food and civil supplies, migrating labourers, security concerns, healthcare facilities and so on. Officials of the departments concerned are added in these groups.

Sources in district administration informed that all CCTVs belonging to police department, HDMC and other agencies will be brought under one surveillance system under the DC’s office. This system will help the district administration keep a vigil on peoples’ movements in different zones. Some private organisations including the Deshpande Foundation and a few startups have joined hands with the district administration in this initiative. 


