Technicalities hold up Covid-19 testing laboratory in Nashik
2020-04-26
The Covid-19 laboratory that was supposed to start testing throat swab samples of patients from Saturday will now begin its operations on Sunday. Officials in-charge of the process of starting the first Covid-19 laboratory in the district at Dr Vasantrao Pawar Medical College Hospital and Research Centre, Nashik, told TOI that the full-fledged operations of the laboratory have been postponsed by a day due to certain formalities. The laboratory was given the green signal to test throat swab samples of Covid-19 patients after it successfully tested the samples sent by the All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS), Nagpur—appointed as the mentor for testing laboratory process by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)—last Sunday.However, the National Accreditation Board of Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) has called for another round of sample testing before the lab begins full-fledged operations. “We were to begin testing throat swab samples from Saturday. However, due to some technical issues, the testing process has been put off by a day at least,” said a senior official from the district administration. “Known samples are being tested again today (Saturday) under the watchful eyes of the NABL. The process, which takes around five hours, will run till midnight. We will get a clear picture as to whether the laboratory can start functioning or not on Sunday,” said the official. The need for having a laboratory in Nashik was felt all the more after there was a sudden surge in the number of confirmed Covid-19 positive cases in Malegaon. The huge number of throat swab samples was becoming a burden for the testing laboratory at Shree Bhausaheb Hiray Government Medical College and Hospital in Dhule. While the throat swab samples from Satana and Malegaon are sent to Dhule, samples from the rest of the district are sent to Armed Forces Medical College, Pune.“A single batch of 80 samples can be tested at a time and the process takes somewhere around four to four-and-a-half hours,” said the official. The testing laboratory at Nashik has come up with the contribution of the medical college that has provided the infrastructure and microbiologists. The administration has procured the testing kits with the help of district guardian minister Chhagan Bhujbal. Datar Genetics has provided the laboratory equipment required for the process.-Abhilash Botekar