Techie tries to sneak home, quarantined
2020-04-29
GUNTUR: A young techie working in Maharashtra managed to cross three states amid the nationwide lock and reached home in Guntur on Tuesday only to land up in quarantine facility. His dream to stay home with parents was short lived as neighbours informed authorities.


Twenty-seven-year old PM Ramakrishna, a resident of Brodipet in Guntur city, has been working as a human resources manager with an IT firm in Aurangabad for the past couple of years. Worried over the rising Covid-19 cases in Maharashtra, particularly in Aurangabad, Ramakrishna decided to return to home. Aurangabad has reported over 50 positive cases and six deaths. 

But despite Guntur reporting double the number of cases, the techie decided to risk going home. He feared that the lockdown might be extended beyond May 3. He reportedly struck a deal with a cargo container driver and travelled to Hyderabad, sitting among stocks of pharmaceutical products.

After reaching Hyderabad on Sunday, Ramakrishna reached Secunderabad railway station and reportedly waited for several hours to get into a goods train. Sources said that he got into an open wagon of a goods train at Secunderabad station and finally got down in the outskirts of Vijayawada. He contacted a friend, who picked him from Vijayawada at night and brought him home on Monday. 

However, Ramakrishna’s luck ran out when neighbours, who were aware of the fact that he worked in Maharashtra, immediately alerted the local police. The locals, who were worried about the high number of Covid-19 cases in Maharashtra, reportedly complained to municipal corporation authorities as well. Soon a team of health workers and staff from the ward secretariat visited Ramakrishna’s residence and took a statement from all the family members. 

Upon recommendation of the health workers team, police reached Ramakrishna’s home and shifted him to a quarantine facility. Officials directed him to stay in quarantine for 14 days. 


