Covid-19 scare in Kolkata: Techie faces locals’ wrath after return from Finland
2020-03-21
KOLKATA: A 30-year-old techie who had returned to Kolkata from Finland on Thursday and had kept herself in home isolation was allegedly ostracized and threatened by local residents and political leaders to leave the neighbourhood. On Friday, she inally approached the airport authorities and cops to take her to a quarantine facility in the city to get a certificate that stated her as “asymptomatic”. She then distributed a photocopy of the certificate to all her neighbours to get access to her home.


 Coronavirus in India latest updates

The woman lives in a two-storied house at Jagaddal in North 24 Pargana with her elderly parents. “I had a tough time managing tickets and taking a detour to come back to my home from Finland. But that is nothing compared to the trouble my family and I had to face here. I practically had to beg strangers to allow me to stay in my own home even when I had been following all the necessary procedure,” the woman told TOI.

She had her ticket booked for March 22 but following the India government’s advisory, she brought forward her trip and reached India within March 18. Since all flights from Finland to India were already suspended, she flew to Moscow, where from she took a flight to Delhi and reached India at 11pm on Wednesday. She came to Kolkata on Thursday morning.

“I underwent four rounds of checks at four airports. On reaching Kolkata, I approached the health officer and got myself screened. They made me sign two sets of self-declaration forms and allowed me to go home. But I stayed in self isolation,” the woman said.

However, some neighbours called cops on Thursday and two officers reached her home. But they left after seeing she had kept herself in home quarantine. But by evening, another set of neighbours, with a local political leader came to her house and asked her to leave. At night, cops came again.

“I couldn’t make them understand that I have been following all protocols. So, on Friday I somehow convinced my driver to take me to the airport where I met the health officials, who took me to the quarantine centre at New Town where doctors tested me and gave a certificate stating I was asymptomatic. I took the same to the police station and accompanied by cops I could finally enter my home,” she said.

“We were informed by locals that a woman had come from Moscow and so we had gone to check her health status. On Friday, she came to us with all test reports and we escorted her to her home,” said an officer of Jagaddal PS.

(With inputs from Mayukh Sengupta)
