Tejas flays CM Nitish Kumar on Covid-19 preparations
2020-04-03
PATNA: While extending RJD’s support to the Nitish government in battling the Covid-19 pandemic, leader of opposition Tejashwi Prasad Yadav also assailed the CM for lack of preparation on several fronts.


In a statement issued on Thursday, Tejashwi said that RJD, as a responsible opposition, is ready to offer any help. “Thank you honorable chief minister Nitish KumarJi, you finally chose to address Bihar on the 18th day, while other CMs have repeatedly addressed their people. Bihar was anxiously waiting to hear from you on the alertness, awareness and preparedness so far made by the state government on social, economic and healthcare fronts,” Tejashwi said.

He added, “But to Bihar’s disappointment, these were vaguely addressed in the CM’s speech. He compared this pandemic with floods and drought all along your address, which is not the fact. Covid-19 is a health pandemic and it requires a more serious approach.”

It may be mentioned here that Nitish had addressed the people on steps being taken by the state government, through videostreaming from his 1, Anne Marg residence in Patna on Wednesday evening.

Tejashwi further said, “The CM did not given any update on the stockpile or procurement of testing kits, PPE, masks, ventilators, ICU beds, gloves, sanitizers, which doctors, first responders and all of us have been demanding from day one. We are lowest in testing, whereas testing is the first step to contain the spread.”

Talking about the issue of migrant workers, Tejashwi said, “The CM said that 3000 calls were received by control rooms set up by the government with 40 teams. However, our party office attended over 4000 calls in the last five days and we arranged food and helped thousands of Bihari’s stranded across the country. We are helping migrants by co-ordinating with respective state governments, volunteers and personal contacts, which primarily should have been done by the Bihar government. On their arrival, migrants were ill treated by the police, hauled up like animals, ferried in garbage carrying trucks.”

He urged Nitish to expedite the containment measures by conducting more tests. “Lockdown, coupled with these efforts will only help to win the battle. It is a marathon and hence a comprehensive action plan is required,” Tejashwi said.


