Telangana marks 100 hotspots to check virus spread
2020-04-08
HYDERABAD: The rapid increase in Covid-19 cases in districts has forced the state health department to declare nearly 100 villages and areas in various districts as 'hotspots' (containment clusters) and impose more restrictions on movement of people. 

People residing in these hotspots would not be allowed to come out of their houses for 14 days. All provisions, vegetables and medicines will be given at their doorstep.

For all practical purposes, these hotspots will not open up even if the lockdown is lifted on April 14 as the new14-day restrictions started on Monday or Tuesday in most of these areas. The measures are the same ones which helped state control virus spread in Karimnagar after 10 Indonesians were tested positive - restrictions were imposed for 14 days in a radius of 3km where the Indonesians had stayed and it paid rich dividends.


15 hotspots in Nizamabad dist

These steps are being taken to prevent spread coronavirus by district authorities," health director Dr G Srinivas Rao told TOI. The state is closely looking at Adilabad, Nizambaad, Suryapet, Gadwal, Mahbubnagar, Kamareddy and Khammam districts which are getting more cases every day.

Adilabad district health officials said 19 wards in Adilabad municipality, five villages in Neradigonda and three in Utnoor mandal are declared as hotspots. Of total 10 positive cases in the district, six are from Adilabad town, three from Neradigonda and one from Utnoor mandal. "Over 100 teams deployed to survey each house in contained localities," Adilabad DMHO Thodasam Chandu said. Seventy-three from district had attended TJ event in Delhi.

In Suryapet, Wardhamanu Kota village was sealed on Monday as six positive cases were reported . The six were infected when a Covid-19 patient visited the family. Thirty-three from Wardhmanu Kota and seven from Masireddypally were shifted to isolation wards as they moved closely with positive cases. Energy minister G Jagadish Reddy too visited the village on Tuesday.

In Nizamabad, collector C Narayana Reddy on Tuesday announced 15 areas as hotspots after 10 new cases took district total to 36. They include Malapally, Hymadpura, Habeebnagar, Khilla Road, Bodhan, Bhimgal, Autonagar, Makloor and Nandipet. He said each cluster covered about half to one kilometre from the homes of positive cases.

In Kamareddy, five localities - Teachers' Colony, Madina Colony, Arafat Colony - and five other areas adjacent to these colonies were identified as hotspots.

With first case being reported in Khammam, collector R V Karnan declared Pedda Thanda near Khammam as containment cluster. "Even in Khammam town we won't allow people to come out after 11am except for medical emergencies," the collector said.

Mahbubnagar district administration declared two areas as hotspots with three new cases on Tuesday.

Meanwhile, Adilabad town police booked case against the doctor who attended TJ meet and performed surgeries apart from attending duties after returning. The complaint was filed by Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences' director Balaram Naik and doctor was booked under Sections 176, 188, 270 and 271 of Disaster Management Act and also relevant sections of Epidemic Diseases Act.

