Telangana: 60 days of lockdown over, but Covid-19 stigma still roaming free
2020-05-24
HYDERABAD: The stigma of being a Covid-19 patient has not withered away even as India completes two months in lockdown. Social media has many videos of neighbours applauding those who have recovered from the virus attack and returned home. But these images hide the painful fact that hundreds of others must learn to live with being treated as pariahs even after being cured.

Sniggered at by neighbours, they are often looked down upon or shunned whenever they step out to buy groceries or essential items.

A 58-eight-year-old man, who was discharged from Gandhi Hospital in early May, says it has been a bitter two weeks ever since he has come back home. “No one in my colony even says hello to me. I am shunned wherever I go. Some of the residents even asked our watchman to not step out when I pass by. Is it a crime to be a Covid patient?” he sought to know.

A 43-year-old man feels the same. A resident of Suryapet market area where a large number of coronavirus cases were reported, he is unable to digest the way society treats him. “I finished my home quarantine recently after treatment. To my shock, a local corporator along with two officials came knocking my door and asked me to vacate my home. They insisted I stay in some other place or go to Hyderabad. They said they will make arrangements. I am wondering why I was discharged,” he said.


Man removed from job on testing positive

He said he is healthy like any other person and was discharged only after he tested negative twice. “But, society, gripped in unknown fears, is not ready to accept this fact,” he rued. Ramesh (name changed), who hails from Bihar but resides in Hyderabad’s Old City, lost his job once it became known that he was Covid-19 positive. He was working in a milk booth. His employer removed him and did not pay him his April salary. “It’s ok. But, I had to shift to a new locality because of people’s behaviour towards me. I am now searching for a new job,” he said.

Several other patients feel they have been wronged by society. A 36-year-old man from Khammam says he sees fear in the eyes of people. “Life for others during the lockdown is normal, but I have to live with the stigma that I am a coronavirus patient. Why can’t people accept it like any other disease,” he wondered.

More than 1,000 people have been discharged in Telangana after undergoing the treatment for coronavirus. Some of them have created their own chat group to stay in touch and support one another. “When we were in the hospital, we created this group. Now, we enquire about one another’s health,” Akhil (24) of Warangal Urban district said.

A 35-year-old resident of Jiyaguda in the Old City sounds optimistic after contracting the virus. Recently, she is back home. “Hum ko darna ki kya baat hai (Why should we be afraid). Why should I worry about society? I stand firm and nothing can rattle me,” she told STOI. Nine members in her family, including her two young sons, had contracted the virus.



