Telangana: No reason to panic, say discharged Covid-19 patients
2020-04-05
HYDERABAD: Relieved on recovering from the Covid-19 infection, patients discharged from city hospitals, on Saturday, said that they were content with the treatment provided at the facilities. While asking people not to panic, some of them that STOI spoke to said that their only issue was the poor communication with doctors in the isolation wards.


“Maybe because the patient load is so high, doctors take a long time to respond at times,” said a patient who landed in the city from London last month and was being treated at Gandhi Hospital. He added: “Suddenly I had chest pain one day and alerted doctors. But no one turned up for hours. I thought I would die. But later the doctor came and explained that it was just a mild panic attack...Though I was offended initially, I realised the situation when I was told that the doctor was busy attending to a critical patient.”



Another patient discharged from Chest Hospital said that it took more than 36 hours for doctors to inform that she had tested positive for coronavirus. “By then a medical bulletin was already released. The description of one patient there matched my case, but there was no official confirmation. Even today, police was informed about my discharge even before I got an intimation,” the patient said suggesting that a nurse or compounder be assigned to isolation wards so that some weight is taken off the doctors and patients’ problems too are heard promptly.

“There is no need to worry to be anxious. I am proof that people can recover with medication,” said another patient adding that most of those discharged were given fever, antiviral, anti-allergic medication. They did not need ventilators or intravenous therapy.

While acknowledging that all medical information is not revealed to a patient or their attenders, P Sravan Kumar, superintendent of Gandhi Hospital, said: “We are not supposed to share any information with the patient. This is done for greater good as there is a chance that a patient, once discharged, may create panic among public.”

He added: “Doctors go, see the condition of patients and come out. There is no interaction... Yes, there might have been some delay in providing facilities at times, as we are dealing with a huge crowd, daily. I just want people to look at a bigger picture here — that many patients are getting cured of Covid-19.”

