Telangana districts see Covid-19 cases rise as migrants come home
2020-05-25
HYDERABAD: Districts that have managed to combat the coronavirus since the pandemic broke out a couple of months ago are now witnessing a surge in number of positive cases as migrant workers return. 

While about half a dozen districts have been registering migrant workers' cases, Yadadri-Bhongiri, Jagityal and Mancherial districts have become hotbeds in the past 20 days. Of the 137 migrant positive cases reported till Saturday, the three districts contributed 94. Thousands of migrants have arrived in Nalgonda, Sircilla, Mahbubabad, Nirmal, Nizamabad, Karimnagar and Janagaon districts in the past few weeks, keeping health officials on tenterhooks. 

Yadadri, Jagityal and Mancherial districts, having a population of eight lakh, 10 lakh and nine lakh respectively, have now registered over 90 cases in the past 10 days. Officials said the situation was due to huge influx of Telangana migrant workers from other states, especially from Maharashtra.


Most migrants lived in Dharavi, Bandra
According to health department officials as many as 2,300 migrant workers have returned to Yadadri-Bhongir from Mumbai since May 1. The district had zero cases for almost 40 days and started reporting cases after government allowed migrant workers. Now, the district has 37 cases. These cases are from Atmakuru, Narayanpur, Valigonda and other mandals.

Jagityal was second in the migrant workers’ cases with 30 cases. About 5,200 people have reached the district from Mumbai since May 1. While 800 workers came to Dharmapuri mandal, 470 to Velgatur mandal and 426 to Gollapally mandal.

“The district has 32 positive cases since the beginning. While four cases were related to Tablighi Jamaat meeting in Delhi, the rest 28 positive cases were migrant workers who had returned from Mumbai. On Friday alone, we got nine Covid-19 cases. All the active cases are migrant workers,” P Sridhar, Jagityal district medical and health officer (DMHO) told TOI on Saturday.

He said most of the migrant workers had lived in Dharavi, Bandra and Vile Parle, and worked as maids, flooring (tiles) workers and some even sold toddy.

Mancherial district had only one case till recently and now has 27 (total 28 cases) migrant workers cases. Around 2,500 people arrived in the district belonging to Hajipur, Jannaram, Luxettipet and Dandepally mandals from Maharashtra.

“The district reported six positive cases on Friday from Kistapur and Rotiguda villages in Jannaram mandal. All of them have been sent to Gandhi hospital today,” Mancherial incharge DMHO Neeraja said.

Cops have now started house-to-house survey of people who had returned from Maharashtra.




