Telangana crosses 1,000 positive Covid-19 cases, strict lockdown to continue
2020-04-27
HYDERABAD: Fifty-seven days after it reported the first coronavirus case, Telangana on Sunday became the ninth state in India to breach the 1000 mark for Covid-19 cases.


On Sunday as the state reported 11 new positive cases, taking the tally to 1001, chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao urged people to strictly follow lockdown guidelines for some more time to help tide over the crisis. The CM said that a clarity on the future course of action in Telangana would emerge after Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s video conference with CMs on Monday. The state government will be meeting again on May 5 to decide whether to lift the lockdown on May 8 or continue for a few more weeks.
 



“To guess anything about coronavirus is tricky as it is very unpredictable and there are many theories doing the rounds about the spread. So people must support the government’s efforts,” TRS working president KT Rama Rao also appealed.

It was on March 1 that the state recorded its first case after a software engineer from Mahendra Hills who had returned from Bengaluru had tested positive for the virus, followed by several others within a span of days from various parts of the city.

The total number of deaths stand at 25 and with another nine people recovering on Sunday, the total number of recovered people rose to 316. There are 660 people still under treatment in three hospitals, including Gandhi Hospital, which has taken 90% of the load.

Analysis of the Covid-19 positive cases in Telangana by experts have revealed that 45% of patients are between 20 and 40 years. Twenty-five per cent is in the 20-30 age group, while children below five are at five per cent and children between 6 and10 years are at four per cent.

Another 15% per cent are in the age group of 40-50 and 13% of patients are in the 51-60 age group.


Med experts baffled as only 9% patients above 60 yrs

Only 9% of the patients are above 60 years, which has left many experts baffled as in countries suchas China and Italy it was the elderly who were primarily affected by the virus.

While there have been a few cases such as that of a Suryapet woman from a pharmacy and a tribal girl from Adilabad contracting the virus from unknown sources, the state government has ruled out community spread.

“Before community transmission, there is an extensive local transmission stage. In a few areas, it is this stage that is visible,” an official said.


