Telangana gives 150 doctors jobs to fight Covid-19, only three take up offer
2020-05-14
HYDERABAD: Even as doctors bravely battle the novel coronavirus pandemic, recruitment of medical professionals by the Telangana government seems to have hit a roadblock.


The state government recently offered temporary contracts to 150 doctors after receiving more than 2,500 applications. The doctors would be employed for as long as they were needed to fight the pandemic.

Those who were selected for the job were asked to report at the Gachibowli sports complex, one part of which has been converted into a Covid-19 hospital. Only six turned up and three of them are believed to have changed their mind and left the hospital.

Doctors, who are being hired on contract, will also be paid a special allowance apart from remuneration. They can be deployed anywhere in the state based on their preference mentioned in the application. “For all practical purposes only three doctors have accepted our offer,” said a source.

The salary is on a par with any government doctors at the entry level. While a specialist is being offered Rs 1 lakh per month to work as a medical officer, for MBBS doctors Rs 40,000 per month is offered. For those doctors who have completed their AYUSH degree, the remuneration is Rs 35,000 per month.

“I don’t think salary is the issue here. There are MBBS doctors who are working for Rs 18,000 to Rs 20,000 per month in private hospitals. At the ground level, some of these doctors are not willing to take up Covid-19 duties because of the risks involved. They may also be worried about the quality of PPEs in some hospitals,” an official said. He added that the temporary nature of the job was also a hindrance.

Majority applications came from nurses

The state department of health, medical and family welfare’s recruitment notification was issued on March 29 and April 1 for doctors, nurses and lab technicians. A majority of the applications came from nurses working in private hospitals.

The nurses asked for a month’s time to join duties as they need to serve the notice period. “With nurses, there is a hope that their jobs might get regularised, but doctors know that their services are not needed post Covid-19,” the official added. The state is now mulling to hire doctors through regular recruitment, but added the process is time consuming.

“What would happen to us post-Covid? We cannot leave our jobs now and work in rural and remote parts of the state, only to go back and start job hunting in a few months. Further, PPE kits available at the hospitals are of poor quality. Our lives will be in danger,” said PS Vijayender, state convener, Telangana Doctors Federation.

Chief minister K Chandrashekar Rao had recently said that the state managed to create a pool of 25,000 doctors and paramedics and was working on getting more personnel.


