Telecounsellors a ring away to help ease stress of lockdown
2020-04-12
Coimbatore: Many psychiatry and psychology clinics have begun offering free counselling to people, who are struggling to handle the growing stress and anxiety levels caused by the lockdown and fear of Covid-19. There are anxious or overworked mothers who are breaking down as they are not able to handle multiple chores in the house, people who have preexisting psychiatric disorders but can’t continue their therapy, and adolescents who are stressed about their board exams being postponed, uncertainty over the next academic year and being confined with their parents throughout the day. In this wake, the Tamil Nadu Association of Clinical Psychologists has received the state government’s approval to share a set of doctors’ numbers to be contacted by people who are suffering from anxiety or unmanageable stress during this crisis for free tele counselling session. Its secretary Dr N Suresh Kumar said, “We have around 70 psychologists across the state, of which around 10 to 12 are from Coimbatore. At least five of them have agreed to share their personal mobile phone numbers for people to call if they are becoming too anxious, stressed or seeing a resurfacing of an earlier psychiatric condition.” While the association has received around 150 calls from across the state since the launch of free counselling a week ago, they are expecting an increase in the calls as the lockdown has been extended. Pointing out that she used to receive five to six calls a day, Dr Karthikayani Murugan, one of psychologists, said, “A few of them are new patients, who are calling to just unburden themselves of the stress like women at home who are stressed and unable to manage multiple chores or adolescents who are at odds with their parents. Others are the ones with pre-existing disorders like depression and obsessive-compulsive disorder. They call me often.” Since the outbreak of Covid-19, she said, a person suffering from obsessive-compulsive disorder was in the habit of sanitizing himself every time he touched any surface including his own plate and tumbler in his house. “We also get calls complaining of domestic disturbances and alcoholics suffering from withdrawal symptoms, etc. People who are restless and those with temper issues, insecurities and business stress are easily provoked by this lockdown and confinement,” Dr Kumar said. Vazhikatti Mental Health Centre too has reported an increase in the number of new people calling them complaining of depression, frequent breakdowns and anxiety issues. They said their members would be available on call through the day.