Temples empty as coronavirus scare keeps people home
2020-03-18
Nagpur: After section 144 was imposed in the city until March 31, people are staying away from temples too. Renowned temples were open, with sanitisers or soap and water at the entrance, and staff and pandits on duty, but there were no devotees on Tuesday. For the first time, most holy places TOI visited had negligible people.

The usually crowded Sai Mandir on Wardha Road was so quiet that the sound of the bell echoed. The vendors selling flowers, garlands and prasad had no customers to serve. A liquid soap bottle hung near the washing area, to wash hands before going inside. “The temple is open, but only two devotees came since morning. We have also stopped mahaprasad. There will be no celebrations on Thursday as well,” said Deepak Borgaonkar, a committee member.

It was disconcerting to see the pundits worshipping and cleaning the idols with their masks on.

The security guard at the entrance of Ganesh Tekdi Mandir was applying nilgiri oil on the wrists of all devotees, a measure to prevent corona according to them. Pouches of soap were also kept near the tap. “In last three days, very few devotees have come. We stopped serving meals or prasad, and only offer modak to Lord Ganesh in the morning,” said Sandeep Sharma, a pandit. 

On Tuesdays, which is the day of Lord Hanuman, devotees arrive in huge numbers at Ram Nagar Hanuman Mandir. But only two people were there in the evening. The famous Shani Mandir at Sitabuldi had literally no devotee.

On the other hand, devotees of Lord Buddha were present in decent numbers at Deekshabhoomi. “Since morning, there was no one inside Deekshabhoomi, but since afternoon people have started to come. We have not kept it closed,” said Bhanteji, a monk.

While some devotees were wearing a mask, some had a do-not-care attitude. “We have a wedding in a few weeks in our family. Hence, we came to seek the blessings of Buddha,” said Sonal Uike, a primary schoolteacher.

Even Telangkhedi Temple bore a deserted look. The prasad distribution and aarti has been called off until March 31 here. There were no arrangements for sanitizers or soaps too. “Today is Tuesday, and usually devotees line up all the way to the stairs to offer prayers. Today, there is nobody,” said Nilesh Tiwari, head pandit. Other priests believe the number of devotees has decreased from 100-150 to 5-10 in just a day.

The staff at all temples was working diligently with masks, cleaning and mopping the courtyards, especially the breathtakingly beautiful Swaminarayan and Balaji Mandir. “We are aware of coronavirus but couldn’t resist visiting the temple. Anyway slowly everything will be shut down, hence we decided to offer prayers,” said a devotee.


