Temples across Tamil Nadu lose Rs 75 crore due to lockdown
2020-06-03
CHENNAI: Temples in Tamil Nadu have lost a potential Rs 75 crore in hundial collection and ticket sales ever since the lockdown was enforced on March 25.


The state government has refused to allow the Hindu Religious & Charitable Endowments (HR&CE) department to reopen around 40,000 temples under its jurisdiction, despite the Centre allowing religious places to open from June 8.

HR&CE officials said annual festivals fell during the lockdown owing to which the Palani Dandayudhapani Swami temple, Tiruchendur temple, Samayapuram Mariamman temple and Madurai Meenakshi Amman temple lost substantial revenue. “Out of the 40,000-odd temples, only a handful earn big revenue. Others have a large number of properties in the name of the deity and rent is their main revenue,” a senior HR&CE official told TOI.

He said a temple earns two types of revenue. “The main source is the hundial collection, the revenue from sale of tickets, prasadams, letting out of marriage halls and guest rooms. Due to the lockdown, revenue from these sources is completely lost. The other source of revenue is the rent from properties and this may be delayed but it not lost completely,” said the official.

“During the lockdown, three important annual festivals in Murugan temples could not be held -- Panguni Uthiram, Vaikasi Visakam and Chitra Pournami. During these festivals the revenue for the Arupadai (six) Murugan temples is the maximum,” said the official.

Palani temple collections are about Rs 1 crore to Rs 2 crore during the non-festival season. During festival season, it collects about Rs 10 crore in the months of March, April and May, due to the Panguni Uthiram festival and then the Vaikasi Visakam and also holiday season.

“This year, as the Panguni Uthiram and Vaisaki Visakam came in April, and the temple was closed before that. It has incurred a loss of about Rs 10 crore,” said a temple official.

Madurai Meenakshi temple has lost Rs 2.40 crore during the lockdown in hundial collection alone. “Apart from hundial collection, the revenue loss from other sources including ticket sales, rent from letting out marriage halls, shops and establishments is around Rs 2 crore. April would be the peak hundial collection,” said a temple official.

The Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams Temple in T Nagar lost Rs 1.2 crore a month in collection and Rs 7.5 lakh from sale of laddus per week. “We used to get not less than Rs 1.20 crore each month in the hundials and each week we used to sell 15000 laddus at Rs 50 per piece. Loss from sale of laddus alone is Rs 90 lakh,” said a TTD board member.

(Inputs from Padmini Sivarajah)

