Coronavirus in Tamil Nadu: Temples cancel festivals, churches call off mass till March 31
2020-03-20
CHENNAI: With two more people testing positive for Covid-19 in Tamil Nadu in the last two days, temples across the state have cancelled their annual festivals to prevent people from gathering in large numbers.


The Tamil months of Panguni and Chitharai (March-April) are famous for festivals across the state, when temple chariots are taken around temples with hundreds of devotees in attendance. “The Panguni Uthiram festival, on April 6, is being cancelled based on the health department’s advisory. Palani and other five other Murugan temples will also cancel the festival,” a Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowment (HR&CE) department official said. It is traditionally celebrated as a marriage festival at Murugan temples.

In Chennai, the Panguni fest at Mylapore’s Kapaleeswarar has been cancelled. 

Undeterred by the government’s call for social distancing, a large crowd gathered at the information centre of Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams in T Nagar for a four-hour dhanvanthri yaga to beseech the Gods to prevent the spread of the coronavirus.

In the Nilgiris, Protestant and Catholic churches have cancelled mass till March 31. Sources at the Catholic Sacred Heart Church in Ooty said regular mass was called off till month-end though the church will remain open for individual prayers.

“This is the Lenten period, so we were supposed to have a grand mass this Sunday. We have now been told we will be intimated about it on Saturday,” said Anthony Patrick, a parishioner at Catholic St Mary’s Church in Ooty.

Timothy Ravinder Dev Pradeep, Bishop of Church of South India (CSI), said, “More than 200 churches and 145 educational institutions and hostels fall under the Coimbatore diocese of the CSI (which includes the Nilgiris). While schools are closed till March 31, churches will have regular mass but the duration will be reduced. Awareness on hand hygiene is being created.” 

