Coronavirus scare in Kolkata: Temples take steps to curb crowds on premises
2020-03-16
KOLKATA: Restrictions have been imposed on visitor movements in Belur Math, Kalighat and Dakshineswar temple to prevent large gatherings. Offering puja at the temples, however, will not be hampered. Tarapith temple, which also gets thousands of devotees every day, is yet to come out with guidelines for gathering on the premises. 


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Meetings with the Ramakrishna Math O Mission president, Swami Smaranananda, and other monks at Belur Math have been put on hold for the time being and ‘diksha’ or the initiation process has been postponed. Devotees have been asked to get in contact after April 14. “There is a World Health Organisation directive against large gatherings to minimise any chance of infection being spread. Both the central and state governments are appealing to people to avoid crowds. Keeping these concerns in mind, we are trying to restrict crowding at the complex,” said Swami Suvirananda, general secretary, Ramakrishna Math O Mission.

While there will be no restriction on “darshan”, volunteers posted at the gates will allow in only one devotee at a time. Gatherings during aarti and prasad distribution will also be avoided for the time being. The guest house on the temple premises will be closed till March 31. “We have many devotees from abroad and we will take a call on that later,” Suvirananda said.

The Dakshineswar Temple Trustee Committee has decided to impose curbs on visitor movements. Devotees will be allowed in small batches while volunteers will ensure there is no gathering on the premises. “There is no restriction on offering puja or visiting the temple. But we have started restricting movement of devotees,” said committee secretary Kushal Chowdhury. Kalighat temple is also allowing devotees inside in small batches. Posters and placards regarding coronavirus will soon be put up on the premises and precautionary measures will also be announced frequently to increase awareness about the disease.

Tarapith, however, yet to take any decision on the issue. The temple committee on Sunday protested against messages on social media that tried to stir up an infection scare inside the temple. “There is no restriction so far. Animal sacrifice will also continue. However, we are keeping a close watch on any advisory from the central and state governments,” said Pulak Chatterjee, a member of the sebayet committee. 

The coronavirus scare has also touched the fair at Thakurnagar organized by the Matua community around March-end. A section of Matua leaders has raised concerns about the large gathering, which might lead to greater chances of getting infected. However, according to sources, Bongaon MP Shantanu Thakur said he will take a call after assessing the situation for a few more days.

(With inputs from Rupak Banerjee, Someswar Boral, Sanjib Chakraborty & Saikat Ray)


