Ten in Ghaziabad quarantined after 32-year-old tests positive for Covid-19
2020-03-28
GHAZIABAD: Ten people have been put in home quarantine after a 32-year-old man from Shalimar Garden Extension 2 tested positive on Thursday. 


Health officials said it was a case of local transmission — he had come in contact with a person from Noida who had Covid-19. Now, 10 people — including four members of his family, a domestic help and a woman colleague — who had come in contact with him have been home quarantined. Their condition is being monitored. Samples of six of them have been collected for testing.

He has been admitted at the MMG District Hospital since March 24. That was the day the other person who tested positive on Thursday had also been admitted. The 30-year-old from Vaishali Sector 6 had gone to his sister’s place in Delhi before leaving for Dubai. However, he reportedly did not come in contact with anyone after returning.

On Friday, nine in Ghaziabad were admitted to hospitals for monitoring. Two were admitted to the Combined Hospital — one had come in contact with foreign nationals in Jaipur and the other had come across foreign nationals in Rishikesh. The seven others — including a pregnant woman from Modinagar and an 82-year-old woman from Brij Vihar — were admitted to MMG District Hospital.

Test reports of nine people, meanwhile, came back negative. They were all discharged. On Friday, 11 samples were sent for testing.

The health department, meanwhile, is doing its bit to keep people out of hospitals. On Friday, it disinfected localities where two Covid-19 patients live. Apart from this, three major hospitals, district headquarters, court complex and several societies in Raj Nagar Extension were also sanitized. The health department said 4.5 lakh people living in 85 societies within a 5-km radius around three coronavirus patients of the district are under real-time monitoring.

Six areas — CMO Office, CDO Office, PWD guest house and three apartments of Kaushambi — have been identified as high-risk zones by the health department. The health department is spraying sanitizer and germicides every three hours to sanitize these six high-risk zones.


