Terming quarantine centres at village level ‘worst of the lot’, U’khand HC directs state to release funds to gram pradhans
2020-06-03
NAINITAL: Calling the quarantine centres established at the village level ‘worst of the lot’, their state ‘pitiable’ and the hygiene condition ‘extremely poor’, the Uttarakhand high court (HC) on Tuesday directed the secretary health and the secretary disaster management to order the district magistrates (DMs) to disburse funds to the gram pradhans.

The direction came from the bench of Justice Sudhanshu Dhulia and Justice Ravindra Maithani while it was hearing a bunch of public interest litigations (PILs) highlighting the state of quarantine centres established across the state as well as the threat posed by the migrant workers entering Uttarakhand without proper screening.

The observations were made by the bench as it took cognizance of the report submitted by the District Legal Services Authorities (DLSA) of Dehradun, Nainital, US Nagar and Haridwar districts. “The sense which we are getting after studying these reports is that the quarantine centres which have been established at village level are the worst of the lot. These quarantine centres in villages are mostly functioning in government primary schools and secondary schools. Their condition, as per the reports, is pitiable. First and foremost, there are no facilities in these centres to provide food to the inmates. Food is being provided by the villagers and the family members of the inmates. In many of these quarantine centres where inmates are more than 30, there are only 1 or 2 toilets. What is most shocking is that the hygienic condition of these toilets is also extremely poor,” read the court order.

It added that since the gram pradhans lack funds, they are in no condition to manage these centres. “We refer here to a Government Order dated 04.05.2020 passed by the Government of Uttarakhand wherein a duty has been cast upon the district magistrate to coordinate with the 'gram sabhas' and 'gram pradhans'… We are afraid that this is not being done properly as of now. We therefore direct the secretary, health, and the secretary, disaster management, of Uttarakhand, to pass appropriate orders to the district magistrates so that their own order dated 4.05.2020 should be implemented in letter and spirit and there are enough funds with the 'gram sabhas' to manage and run these centres,” the court said, adding that alternative arrangements should be made for villages where gram pradhans are not functioning.

The court also directed the state government to study the report submitted by the legal services authorities and return with solutions by the next date of hearing. The health secretary, meanwhile, has also been directed to file a report on the rapid testing which was ordered by the court on May 20.

The petitioners also informed the HC that several district administrations are using hotels as quarantine centres and charging people for that as well. The bench has directed the state government to provide details of these hotels and discrepancies in them by June 17 when the case will be heard next.


