Thai man with Covid-19 symptoms dies in Coimbatore ward
2020-03-18
COIMBATORE: A 49-year-old man from Thailand, who was tested negative for Covid-19 recently, died at the isolation ward of Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital (CMCH) on Tuesday afternoon. While hospital authorities said he died of renal failure, other sources pointed out his symptoms of fever, accompanied by breathlessness, that led to an organ failure, was how Covid-19 progressed typically. 


The deceased has been identified as Donrosal Khamidoi, from Songkhla. He reportedly came to India with five others on March 6 to visit Hindu temples. He decided to return home on Sunday as he fell sick with fever and became very weak. 

Dr G Ramesh Kumar, deputy director of public health, said, “However, our thermal scanners in the airport detected his fever and we brought him to CMCH the same evening. We collected his throat swab and sent that to Chennai. When he arrived, he was suffering from fever, light breathlessness and an infected ulcer in his leg.” 

Dr Sadagopan, medical superintendent, CMCH, said Khamidoi had a history of diabetic nephropathy and that renal failure was diagnosed almost immediately after he was admitted. “So, we began giving him peritoneal dialysis for his failing kidneys and antibiotics to bring down his temperature. He did not mention having a cold before the fever. We isolated him as he could be a carrier of the virus. He also had uncontrolled diabetes.” 

The public health department said while the test result that came on Monday evening was negative, they continued to isolate him and treat him for his renal failure and septicemia, which he had developed. But he died on Tuesday, Dr Sadagopan said. 

Ramesh said, “We agree that fever followed by multi-organ failure is similar to Covid-19 symptoms, but he tested negative. As per protocol, we are to test suspected symptomatic patients only once. Only Covid-19 positive patients have to be tested twice before being declared negative.” 

The officials have decided not to do a postmortem. The district administration is in touch with Indian embassy in Thailand to send his body back home. 

The public health department officials in Erode have, meanwhile, admitted the teammates of the deceased to the government hospital in Perundurai, where they are put in a special ward. Their blood samples have been collected to test them for Covid-19. 


