The audience forgot about coronavirus for some time during my recent concert in Bengaluru: Mir Mukhtiyar Ali
2020-03-16
Mir Mukhtiyar Ali, a well-known Sufi artiste from Rajasthan, serenaded Bengalureans recently with some soulful tunes. Amid the coronavirus scare, the folk artiste performed to a small set of audience in the city. Those who attended the show came wearing masks and even kept a distance from each other inside the auditorium. In a telephonic conversation after the concert, Mukhtiyar spoke to us about his experience here and shared his views on Sufi music and more. Excerpts:

 
‘Do take care of yourselves, but don’t give in to fear’
The coronavirus pandemic has got many people panicking. However, wherever permitted, artistes are performing in concerts and have been travelling around the world for the same. Mukhtiyar says that while he obeys the regulations in place, he also ensures that panic does not kick in. “One should just follow the rules put in place. Do take care of yourselves, but don’t give in to fear. 
Maut se darna nahi chahiye. We should just keep faith in the almighty,” he says, adding, “During my shows in Bengaluru, I encouraged audiences to enjoy the performance as much as possible. And their applause proved that that they, too, were engrossed in the music. Those few hours, they almost forgot about coronavirus.” 

‘Even in fusion tracks, I try to retain the essence of traditional Sufi music’
Mukhtiyar comes from a family known for their oral tradition of Sufi singing. So, in an age of fusion music, how open is he to collaborate with artistes from other genres. “I do worry about forsaking my traditional values in the quest for fusion music. It also makes me nervous, at times, because even while mixing genres, I would still want to do justice to the conventional format. Hence, whenever I collaborate with my peers, I try my best to retain the essence of Sufi music,” he says.


‘Bollywood trying to commercialise Sufi music is probably not a good idea’
Commercialising Sufi music to fit the Bollywood format may not always work out, according to Mukhtiyar. “It is important to retain the authenticity of Sufi music even in terms of lyrics,” he adds.
Talking about getting youngsters interested in Sufi music, Mukhtiyar says, “We just need to create awareness about this genre of music in its traditional form and those interested will come forward anyway. For instance, when I perform a medley of poems by different artistes from different time periods and backgrounds, people do realise that the message they are trying to convey are the same. And that piques their interest. In fact, as the exposure has increased, more youngsters have been trying to learn Sufi music, of late.”

 
Mir Mukhtiyar Ali’s Karnataka connect…
In the past, Mir Mukhtiyar Ali has performed at multiple locations in Karnataka — Bengaluru, Mysuru and Hampi, to name a few. One might say that the language barrier exists, but he does not feel the same way. “The audiences understand the lyrics, and even applaud when a certain message in the song resonates with them. I absolutely enjoy performing here. People in Karnataka have been very welcoming,” he explains.

 


