The Ups and Downs of Lockdown
2020-03-29
Ahmedabad: Since the Janata Curfew held exactly a week ago, followed by the nationwide 21-day lockdown imposed by the government of India to curb the spread of Covid-19, trade and industry — except those engaged in essential items manufacturing — have come to a complete standstill across Gujarat. TOI’s Niyati Parikh takes stock of the impact of lockdown in the first week of enforcement.

98% transport vehicles off the road

The number of transport vehicles plying on the roads has reduced considerably owing to the lockdown and more than 98% transport vehicles are currently off the road. “Barely 2% of the vehicles are moving including petrol, diesel tankers and milk tankers. Moreover, numerous cars are stuck along the state and district borders as they have been sealed,” said Mukesh Dave, president, Akhil Gujarat Truck Transporters’ Association (AGTTA).

“Movement of essential commodities is so far allowed. However, since businesses are interdependent, there are a lot of glitches. For instance, if packaging material for milk tetrapaks doesn’t reach the milk processing unit, milk cannot be dispatched. Besides, validity of e-way bills is for a limited period and if shipments are delayed due to vehicles getting stuck at state and district borders, this will expire. These are issues which require urgent attention from the government,” said Dave.

Industries stare at liquidity crisis

The complete lockdown has brought production at manufacturing units and economic activity in businesses to a grinding halt and manufacturers across sectors including textile, dyes and chemicals fear a major liquidity crisis. “With the lockdown situation prevailing globally, export orders are either getting cancelled or indefinitely deferred. Europe and US, which are key export markets, are under lockdown too and as a result, payment fulfilments aren’t expected. With lockdown in India, demand will take a further hit, whereas funds invested in procuring raw materials will get stuck, thus resulting in a major liquidity crunch,” said Chintan Thaker, co-chair, Assocham Gujarat State Council.

Dyes and chemicals manufacturing units too are staring at losses to the tune of Rs 1 lakh crore over the 21-day lockdown. “We will neither be able to cater to local demand nor global as the shutdown has halted manufacturing and business operations completely. If this further extends, our payment commitments to clients as well as to our own employees will also be impacted,” said Yogesh Parikh, president, Gujarat Dyestuff Manufacturers’ Association (GDMA).

Low turnout at operational units

Units engaged in manufacturing essential items like medicines have seen a drop in worker turnout due to the lockdown. Drug makers suggest that only 40% of the workforce is able to report to work on account of issues related to transportation as well as the fear of getting infected. “Permits from collector offices are now being issued to essential item makers so that movement of their workers is not restricted,” said an industry insider, who did not wish to be quoted.

“Some initial hiccups will be there when such a massive lockdown is enforced. We expect workers’ turnout to start increasing from Monday,” the industry player informed.

Petrol-Diesel sales decline 90%

With all private vehicles going completely off the road and that too with minimum essential movement coupled with bare minimum movement of transport vehicles, the sale of petrol and diesel have declined by at least 90%, according to industry estimates.

“Fuel stations across the state will remain open from 8am to 4pm only. The timing restrictions will remain till the lockdown situation continues across all 4,000 petrol pumps in Gujarat,” said Arvind Thakkar, president, FGSPDA.

Meanwhile, petroleum dealers are finding it extremely difficult to keep the business running. “A huge operational cost is involved in running a petrol pump. With a sharp decline in sales, we will not be able to sustain business beyond a month or two,” said Padmajay Rathod, owner of a fuel station near Shyamal Crossroads. 

“Against a daily sale of around 50,000 litre, the sale has dropped to 1,500-litre since the shutdown was imposed,” he added.

Retail vegetable prices go up; grain supply intact

While there is no short supply of vegetables and grains, the retail prices of certain vegetables have gone up significantly. “There is no change in the wholesale prices of vegetables. However, due to transportation issues triggered by the lockdown, the supply of some vegetables such as lemon and ginger has declined by 50% over the past couple of days, as they come from neighbouring states,” said Deepak Patel, secretary, APMC – Ahmedabad.

Retail prices however, have skyrocketed by at least 15% amid increased demand, according to estimates by retailers. On the other hand, while there is no shortage of grains and pulses, the supply is a little delayed than usual due to the lockdown. “The APMCs and market yards are shut in some places and therefore, transportation is a major concern. While there is no shortage reported yet, the supply chain has been affected due to the slowdown. The entire stock of pulses in Gujarat comes from neighbouring states. The government has already facilitated movement of trucks and thus, stocks will soon start reaching,” said Rajesh Dalal, president, Ahmedabad Grain Merchants’ Association.

Electricity consumption drops

The demand for power across Gujarat has plummeted with industrial units and commercial establishments remaining closed due to the lockdown. The state’s peak power demand has declined 6,348 MW since Saturday last week.

The maximum power demand of 10,468 MW was recorded on March 26 as against 16,816 was registered in Gujarat on March 21, a day before the nation-wide Janata Curfew was observed on March 22, shows data compiled by the Western Region Load Dispatch Centre (WRLDC), a central government entity.

Reduction in demand from the industrial, commercial and office segments has brought down electricity consumption in the state. The demand from agriculture and residential consumers has not been affected, said power sector experts. 

LPG demand goes up

Even as the demand for regular petro products declined, demand for LPG cooking gas went up. The daily supply of LPG in Gujarat has now surged to 1,900 million tonnes (MT) from 1,870 MT a month ago. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd is taking also taking steps to increase LPG production in its major refineries. IndianOil’s all 509 distributorships in Gujarat are functioning normally, the company said.

(with inputs from Kalpesh Damor)

Gujarat Dairies Have More Milk, Smaller Market In Lockdown 

Prashant.Rupera@timesgroup.com

Vadodara: The dairy sector in Gujarat is witnessing a peculiar situation under the current lockdown.

Usually, with the onset of summer, milk procurement starts declining across the state. But milk unions in the state, which are members of the Gujarat Co-operative Milk Marketing Federation (GCMMF), are witnessing record milk procurement.

“We witness drastic decline in milk procurement during summer, which is a lean season. But currently, we are procuring 260 lakh litres per day (LLPD) which is 6-7 % more compared to last year. This is happening because the milk that was going to private players is also coming to co-operatives,” said R S Sodhi, managing director of GCMMF that markets brand Amul.

Ahead of Sunday’s ‘Janata curfew’ and during the initial days of lockdown, Amul had witnessed sale of milk and other dairy products rising by 15-20% in the state.

“Now, sale of milk products is coming down. Initially, people had resorted to panic buying. From Friday, we are witnessing a decline of nearly 20% in sales,” he said, adding that sales of milk and some other products are likely to witness twists and turns during the remaining days of the lockdown.

In the long term, however, Sodhi foresees a decline of nearly 10% in sales of dairy products. Sale of ice cream has already witnessed a decline of 50-60 % while sales of other dairy products like cheese, cream among others has also seen a beating.

“There is 10-12 % decline in sales of such dairy products due to closure of hotels, restaurants, caterers, eateries and cafeterias among others,” he said, adding that although dairies will compensate during the months of summer, the impact of lockdown will be seen for nearly three months.


