The internet is critical to navigating this pandemic
2020-03-22
We are at a critical point in history. The entire world is being affected by the novel coronavirus COVID-19. Leaders from all walks of life are being tested, as we face an unprecedented situation. From governments to businesses, from societies to families, this pandemic is causing a shift in our way of life – a paradigm shift that puts us all in uncharted territory. The best way to tackle this problem is to ensure that we practice social distancing and good personal hygiene, to ensure that we minimise the chances of community transmission. This implies taking potentially aggressive measures to reduce footfall in places of congregation.

A few decades ago, shuttering shops in this manner would spell disaster for businesses. Today, however, digital business models, the cloud, and new-age technology minimise the erstwhile disruption with the help of high-speed internet. Globally, and especially in India today, broadband is a critical part of the infrastructure needed to realise seamless delivery of essential services. High-speed internet is the prerequisite for uninterrupted life and business today.

Even now, as individuals and families quarantine themselves in their homes, people are already turning to the internet to access not just business solutions to help them outlast the pandemic but to seek solace, entertainment and information on the state of the world. Suddenly, people are trying to establish, “What is essential?” In fact, the interest in the search term, “essential commodities” on Google, has more than doubled in the past three weeks. High-speed internet is needed simply for people to know what is essential and what is not in the coming weeks. People’s social media accounts are starting to turn into mini news outlets while their couch and their laptop become their home office.

For businesses, digitally enabled online operations in the areas of sales, communication, and fulfilment can reduce the impact in today’s disruptive “COVID times”. High-speed data connectivity provides a virtual office-like working environment to all businesses without compromising on safety. As the market shifts, the speed with which businesses act is of the essence. One cannot afford to lose clients due to slow service and other technicalities. A high speed fiber broadband connection ensures that nothing about a business suffers due to the lack of speed or infrastructure, be it while you are having video conferences with the rest of the team or while you are providing services to your clients.

In a crisis, humans have looked to society and their contacts for support. Suddenly, people are being separated from their families, friends, neighbours and social circles as entire cities are entering quarantine. When students and workers are stranded in their college dormitories or in airports abroad, trying to come home or quarantined abroad, being able to pick up a phone and video call them over the internet offers support virtually where distance is an insurmountable factor.

In time, restricted movements, social distancing and the same walls around us, doing the same time, perhaps at home alone, may lead to boredom. To stave off boredom, we turn to the world that the internet offers us. When speed is not restricting someone, the possibilities are endless. It becomes very easy to just pick up that show you’ve been meaning to catch up on and binge it in HD. We may not be able to visit movie theatres, but can stream movies and tv shows that ensures that we have a near endless library of entertainment at hand. Between streaming and gaming, there is enough to keep many people occupied for a long time. If there is a language that you have wanted to learn for a while, now is the time. If you haven’t played the guitar for a while, YouTube lessons are but a click away. There’s a unique opportunity to spend time with and connect with your loved ones. Even if you just run out of groceries, or just want to order take out, you do not need to brave the pandemic and go out, when you can just order things over the internet. Social distancing and working from home have given rise to new ways of working including emergence of concepts like telemedicine and online virtual classes.

I believe that we will emerge from COVID-19 stronger, more united, and wiser. An connected society, thanks to the internet, provides the fulcrum to the combined strength of humanity, for the country’s machinery to continue running in the face of unprecedented headwinds. We have better information, swifter access to emergency services, quality availability of entertainment, instant connectivity to family and friends, uninterrupted and innovative education practices, and access to business solutions and more. 

Decades from now, this time will be looked upon as a critical juncture in human history. This will be a trying time, but we will emerge better for it, and it wouldn’t happen if we weren’t as connected as we are today. High-speed internet connectivity has brought us all together, and it will be critical to braving the storm we are in today.

— The author Bala Malladi is the CEO of ACT Internet


