The pandemic has made art accessible to the world
2020-06-06
With no scope to organise exhibitions and art previews in art galleries — thanks to the Coronavirus pandemic — artists and galleries are slowly moving to the online space. As the world struggles to get back on its feet, artists and art galleries too, are reinventing themselves and embracing the online space, in order to remain relevant. Unsure about whether this move will be permanent or not, for now, galleries and artists say that the show must go on...


Art, too, has to adapt to the new normal
Radhika Gulati, who spearheads Art For Concern, an initiative that conducts exhibitions across the country, says that within a few days of the lockdown being announced, they conducted three exhibitions online. “When the first lockdown was announced, Art for Concern quickly evaluated the online show format. Our first show — Paperage — generated good interest. From there on, we did two other shows. We ensured the right selection of art and the pricing. A part of the proceeds from these shows was directed towards the work that Concern India Foundation was doing in Covid relief efforts.”
Artist Shan Re, who also sent videos and pictures of her art to Los Angeles-based art galleries, says that online galleries are more active than before. “The lockdown has allowed such galleries to function well because a lot more people were visiting them online. Some of them were even able to sell more art,” she says.


COVID-19 pushed a lot of galleries to change formats online too
Bengaluru-based sculptor and installation artist, Romicon Revola says that though online art shows are not a new concept, several galleries and artists took this up because of the pandemic and modified the format accordingly.
“I was a part of two online shows that were interactive in nature and gave a demo on how to make colours out of coffee powder and turmeric powder during the lockdown, in case one runs out of colours, as that was the case with me. The format was different for both the galleries — one of the galleries conducted a video call with me, which is obviously different from what we usually do. It helped me as an artist, because I was able to continue my work and interact with people at the same time,” says Romicon.
“The pandemic has changed things. Now, because many shows and discussions are online, we too are able to see each other’s works, which would otherwise not be possible unless you travelled for that particular exhibition. A lot of senior artists who are not tech-savvy, have received representation from many galleries and we were able to see their work online,” adds Romicon.


Is this the future for art?
The past few months have proven that there is huge potential for art online. In fact, artist Shan Re says that this format is here to stay. “Online art exhibitions will definitely continue in the future because we will continue to maintain social distancing. And keeping that in mind, online shows will definitely be the next step. With online shows, people will be able to view art at their leisure and from the comfort of their homes,” she says.


