‘The pandemic has made me realise the importance of my work as a nurse’
2020-05-04
Dehradun: Sunita Arthur, sister-in-charge of the coronavirus isolation ward at Doon Hospital, feels that for the first time in her 16-year-long career, the pandemic has made her realise the importance of her work as a nurse. Arthur, who is in her forties, says that this is the most challenged she has ever been at work, as not only does she have to care for her patients, but also protect herself from the highly contagious virus. 

For the last two months, she has been following a strict 30-minute-long drill of sanitising herself and putting on her Personal Protection Equipment (PPE) kit. Once inside the ward, she has to be careful about maintaining a safe distance from the patients. The same rigorous process of sanitisation has to be repeated while exiting the ward.

“The nursing staff has to follow a strict protocol while attending to the patients. I thoroughly sanitise myself with a soap kept outside the house before I come in contact with my family. It takes another 30 minutes,” she said. Arthur lives at the Nurses Colony in Dehradun, with her husband, who is part of the support staff at Himalayan Institute of Medical Sciences and her 17-year-old daughter who studies in class 12. “I tell my husband and daughter about my day when I get home. They are worried about the risk my job involves, but are supportive. I sent my mother-in-law to a relative’s place as a preventive measure,” she said.

In spite of the challenges, Arthur takes pride in her job. “I have spent over a decade in this profession, serving patients, but the current crisis has made me take all the more pride in my work. I feel like a soldier serving the nation in the time of a health emergency.”

Arthur added that while administering medication and recording the condition of patients is routine procedure, she now has a new challenge, which is keeping the infected persons calm. “We have to take care of people who are not mentally prepared to stay at these wards and face acute anxieties. We spend most of our time easing their stress and helping them recover,” she said. 

Incidentally, Arthur is following in the footsteps of her mother and older sister, who also chose to be nurses. “I find a lot of peace in serving people. I get several calls from my relatives, who ask me about my well being and encourage me to keep doing my job. It keeps me going and I will continue to serve the country until it is free of Covid-19.”


