Karnataka: The voice behind Covid-19 caller tune busy answering calls, messages from Keralites
2020-05-13
MANGALURU: Delhi-based Tintu Mol Joseph, the voice behind Covid-19 caller tune in Malayalam, is busy answering calls and messages she has been receiving from Keralites across the world.


Tintu Mol also has a Kannada connection. Her parents, TV Joseph and Alice had migrated from Kottayam in Kerala to Sullia taluk in Dakshina Kannada district 24 years ago. 

A voice-over artist for past four years, she told TOI, “It was professor Purushotham Bilimale, also from Sullia, who introduced me to Srikrishna Bhat, a Kannada voice over artist in 2016. After my schooling in Kadaba and Modankap, Bantwal and graduation (BA) from St Agnes College, Mangaluru, I moved to Delhi hoping to clear civil service exams. I joined Jawaharlal Nehru University for postgraduation in International Relations and later Bilimale suggested that I take up a few voice over assignments to support myself.”

“Though I was hoping for Kannada voice over assignments, I got more offers in Malayalam. I did a couple of English and Hindi assignments too,” she added. In mid-March, she got a call from the studio that records for the ministry of health and family welfare offering Covid-19 precaution voice over assignment. “I took it up like any other assignment. I was selected for Malayalam. The same message was recorded in 22 Indian languages. The first recording ws taken at the studio and went well, but after the lockdown, the second and third versions were recorded from home,” she said.

“Initially, only my family and a few friends knew that I was the voice behind the Malayalam caller tune. Those who did not know, even complained that such a lengthy caller tune was a hindrance especially when you are in a hurry to speak to someone. But things changed after a journalist in Kerala found out that it’s my voice, she said.

“Now, Keralites from across the world are appreciating my contribution. And I am humbled by their love. Even in these desperate times people are making the effort to appreciate my work and that gives me joy,” added Tintu, who has been the voice over artist for several government television commercials and radio programmes. 

