The art and science of kolam keep youngsters busy in the lockdown period
2020-03-29
Move over memes and videos as kolams take the floor, quite literally, too. Be it to protest against the government or create awareness about an issue, the simple and understated kolam can deliver the message effectively, say kolam enthusiasts.

Thilagalakshmi Sridharan, a kolam expert who works in a central government office, has come up with two distinctive kolams — one highlighting the importance of washing hands and the other one titled, Stay home, stay safe. She has been drawing unique designs at home for the past four decades and is a specialist in free-hand designs. With nearly a lakh of followers online, she says, through her kolams, she is trying her bit to create awareness about the deadly virus. In the 4*4 design, she has used colours to highlight the virus particles in yellow spheres.
Rasigapriya Lalitha Subramanian, a musician and kolam enthusiast, says that there is more to the simple kolams and one should not underestimate their influence on human beings and society. 

“Our lives and culture are quite entwined like the dots and lines in the kolams. Kolam has its origin in the vedas when lines and designs made of rice flour and natural colours were drawn before performing yaga and homam, and there is mathematics to it. Using kolams to send a message is not something new. In olden days, kolams were also considered as symbols,” says Lalitha, adding, “Kolams were considered an indication that a house is occupied. People believed that thieves used kolams as an identification mark to infer whether people were staying in a house or not. Often, they targeted unoccupied houses to loot valuables.”

Explaining the significance of kolams in Margazhi, she says, “Those days, it was customary to draw huge kolams in the month of Margazhi and place a pumpkin flower in the middle of the cow-dung cake. If the flower kept was a big one, it denoted that the family had a girl of marriageable age — marriage brokers and grooms’ families could approach them for a possible alliance.”

Devaki, aka Devi mami from Mambalam, is a veteran in drawing kolams. A sought-after person for weddings and other auspicious events, she says each kolam is closely associated with human lives. 

According to her, kolams were used as a way to find out whether a girl was happy to take forward an alliance or not. “With no mobile phones and WhatsApp then, people in the family used to observe the pattern a girl drew after meeting a prospective groom. If the lines drawn were not clear or proper and if the girl was seen drawing them at a disturbing pace, it was concluded that she was not in favour of the alliance.”

Elaborating on the types of kolams, she says, “For mappillai azhaippu in weddings, ettu padi kolams are considered auspicious. I decorate the four corners and place kaavi (saffron colour) in the middle. There are also special kolams for muhurtham and oonjal — but all auspicious occasions should have padi kolams only,” she asserts, adding, “There are kolams drawn on the wedding stage in addition to the 18 small kolams that are drawn to appease the Gods, elders and the departed souls.”

While big kolams are usually drawn at the entrances, some people draw them inside puja rooms too. “There are specific kolams for each day of the week, from Monday to Sunday and they denote the navagrahas. They are relatively small and also include writing the mool mantra inside them,” explains Lalitha.

Another staple in the puja room is the Aiswarya kolam, which is often drawn on Tuesdays and Fridays. Kolams are also connected with months and festivals. “For Lakshmi Kubera puja, Kubera kolam is drawn; a coin and a flower are placed in each box,” says Lalitha. She adds that it’s chariot kolam or ther kolam that is drawn for Pongal and Rathasapthami as a tribute to Sun God.
Youngsters like Saranya S are taking time to learn the art as well as the science behind it. A techie by profession, Saranya says that she found the joining of dots in big kolams similar to an algorithm. “The way we connect the dots to come up with a symmetrical design is no joke,” she says. 

According to her, to complete a sikku kolam (tangle), one needs not only practice but also a sharp brain. “But these days, not many know that there are certain norms while drawing a kolam. While the lines should be even numbers, 2, 4, 6 ... for an auspicious-day kolam, single or three lines denote inauspicious incidents like a death in the family,” she adds.
 
Purvisha Ravi, a state government employee, has decided to make use of this lockdown period for acing her kolam skills. “I have a three-year-old and balancing work and home were taking a toll on my mental and physical health. So, during this lockdown time, I decided to go back to my earlier routine — sleeping early, waking up on time, drawing kolams and doing some exercises. I used to be good at kolams using rice flour paste. My mom has a collection of kolam books, which used to be popular in the 80s and 90s, but now I think I can sharpen my skills using YouTube videos.”

Thilagalakshmi says, “I am very active on social media, YouTube and WhatsApp groups on kolam. I get a lot of requests for conducting kolam workshops and am interested in teaching, too. These days, many youngsters are looking at kolam to help them focus better and for improving their concentration,” she notes.


When kolams get creative 
Isai Kolam: This is a tool used in teaching classical 
music to children. The teacher would draw dots on a blackboard and when teaching a song, a student would be asked to join the dots. By the time the student completes the kolam, the song too ends. This is considered as an effective way to teach music to children and enhance their interest as they would easily grasp the thalam.


Neer Kolam: Oil is spread on a flat plate and a kolam is drawn using rice flour on it. Then, water is slowly poured on to it from one side, until it covers the entire design. The design looks as if the kolam is floating on water. 


