Coronavirus: Thermometers used at Chandigarh airport, scanner missing
2020-03-06
MOHALI: In the absence of non-intrusive thermal imaging technology to screen passengers at Chandigarh International Airport, the ill-equipped health department is using primitive methods for coronavirus scan. They are using thermometers instead of advanced thermal scanners at the airport. 


So far, 4,943 passengers have been screened in the past few days at the airport and 70,106 at the airports/border checkposts across the state. The health department is daily reporting to the central surveillance unit, Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme, Delhi.

Officiating deputy commissioner Aashika Jain said, “The civil surgeon has been instructed to immediately buy a thermal scanner and install it at the airport. The passengers arriving from two international flights must undergo checks with scanners using non-intrusive thermal imaging technology. No chances can be taken.”

“The Mohali administration has made isolation wards at every private hospital in the district. There are two such wards in every government hospital. The administration is taking all necessary precautions and there is no need to panic as no positive case has been detected in the district. All schools in the district are also safe,” Jain added. 

On the other hand, the Punjab government has sounded an alert at the Mohali as well as the Amritsar airports, with advisories prominently displayed for passengers. Information material is also on display at the airports, where screening of passengers has been initiated. Medical teams, along with paramedics from the health department, have also been deputed.

Announcements are being made for passengers to declare on their own if they had symptoms. The airport authorities have been directed to keep a close vigil on suspected passengers. The district health department has issued an advisory for the public as well as government and private health institutions. 

Civil surgeon Dr Manjit Singh has asked the health institutions to keep isolation wards ready. He said there was no need to panic, but precautionary measures were needed. The civil surgeon, along with district epidemiologist Dr Harmandeep Kaur, held a special meeting with officials at the international airport in Mohali and asked them to notify the health department immediately upon receiving any suspected patient.

Through the advisory, private hospitals were asked to have isolation wards ready, keep suspected patients under constant surveillance and notify the health department immediately upon receipt of any such case. 

