These women cops in Bhopal take coronavirus challenge in their stride
2020-03-28
BHOPAL: Three probationer women DSPs, recently posted as SHOs at three city police station, are working shoulder-to-shoulder with their male peers for 15-16 hours daily ever since the lockdown came into force. 


Speaking to TOI, DSP Richa Jain, posted at Chunabhatti police station, said, “I reach police station by 7 am and work late till midnight. In the morning, we focus basically on ensuring milk and vegetable supply. The grocery shops and medical shops open around 10 am and we focus on maintaining social distancing among customers. We ensure that not more than three people gather outside a shop. We got white circles drawn outside shops for social distancing. We help grocery traders when they go out to purchase items from wholesale traders. I personally go to various areas and appeal them to stay at home.. I and other police staff distribute food packets in the area to needy people.” 

On challenges being faced in personal life after lockdown, DSP Richa said, “I got married a year back and my husband DSP Akshay Choudhary is posted in Raisen. We have not got time to talk to each other properly ever since the lockdown has been enforced.” 

DSP Shivali Chaturvedi, posted as SHO Sukhi Sewania, said, “I have been working for around 16-17 hours. I have to remain active so as not to miss any instructions of senior officers being broadcast on wireless set. It takes around an hour for me to reach police station so I leave for work around 6 am. Before leaving I have to prepare my food as I have sent my brother and sister, who resided with me to Chhatarpur, my native town. I leave for work around 6 am after preparing my own lunch. We have contacted companies located in the area and asked them to distribute food packets to many needy people from villages including daily wage workers, under their CSR activity. My day goes in patrolling the jurisdiction area and I work late till 12.30 to 1 am. We spread awareness among people that lockdown is for their own safety and appeal them to remain at home.” 

DSP Antima Samadhia, posted as SHO Eintkheri said, “I reside in a room above the police station itself so I start my day early at 6 am with patrolling in the area. Around 9 am I brief the police station staff on their duty and after attending the radio talk with senior officers I go out on patrol in the area. My family resides in my native town Shivpuri and my younger brother and sister reside in Bhopal. Earlier I used to visit them daily, but now I just talk to them over phone. The villagers in my jurisdiction area are worried for their cropsas it is raining so enforcing lockdown has become a challenge. Many daily wage workers,approach Eintheri police station seeking help. I contacted the village Sarpanch and arranged for their food under the mid-day meal scheme.”

