Rajasthan: These Covid-19 warriors stand stoic at frontline
2020-05-14
JAISALMER: They have been easily matching men on most fronts and even outshining them in key areas when it comes to balancing between job and family or fighting Covid-19.


Meet the women officials in Barmer, Jodhpur and Jaisalmer who are currently posted in the virus-hit areas along the district borders keeping tabs on the movement of migrant workers and others. 

Away from their home for almost two months now, some of them work 18 to 20 hours daily. Most of these women officials are living alone with their husbands on duty elsewhere and kids with their parents. 

In cases where the family is together, the biggest concern for these officials are their young children. They admit that duty gets preference over family during the ongoing lockdown and that despite living together, they do not get much time to spend with the kids.

Woman administrative officers are monitoring Dhorimanna, Sindhari, Gudamalani, Balotara, Siwana, Baytoo and Chauhatan sub divisions in Barmer district that are sensitive in regard to entry of outsiders. While in Udaipur district, which is adjoining Gujarat, two police officers of Jaisalmer are on duty to check that no corona suspect enters Rajasthan.

Dhorimanna SDM Kusum Lata Chauhan (27), who had lost her husband Ashish in an accident in 2016, has left her 4-year-old son at her parents’ house in Jodhpur. She last met her family on Holi. “My only contact with my son is through frequent video calls,” says Chauhan. She says that as Dhorimanna is a sensitive entry point, she has to be prepared for round-the-clock monitoring and untimely inspections.

Similarly, Jaisalmer resident IPS officer Prem Dhandev (37), who is at present deployed at Girwa near Udaipur as Dy SP and in-charge of the state border adjoining Gujarat, says, “As my 5-year-old son is with me, I take a bath after every scheduled or sudden visit at the check posts, which is several times in the day. I take all precautions and ensure that I sanitise myself properly and change my clothes before I enter the house,” she said.

Another official from Jaisalmer Chetna Bhati is deployed as Dy SP in the woman cell at Udaipur but her duty is in a curfew-bound area in the city. She has penned poems and jingles to spread awareness on Covid-19 which have become quite popular in the area.

Kanchan Rathore, SDO, Sindhari in Barmer and a resident of Jaisalmer has not met her family and two children for over 50 days. She monitors the lockdown and shelter homes. She oversees survey, screening and other work of the village level teams. Her role increases as an officiating magistrate. “My 5-year-old daughter keeps asking me when I will be back home. She is too young to understand and at times, it gets difficult to explain to her,” says Rathore, adding that there are times when she does not find time for meals.

Mamta Lahua, tehsildar at Sindhari in Barmer, is fortunate to be living with her family but that also means double work. “At least I am fortunate that my family is around. I take all precautions and safety measures to ensure they do not get exposed to the infection,” she said.

Jaisalmer SP Kiran Kang, whose husband is posted at Tonk, says the corona pandemic has brought a lot of changes in her personal and professional routine. “My 4-year-old daughter is with me and has surprisingly been very understanding and supportive. There have been times when duty called late in the night and I had to go leaving her sleeping,” she said, adding that she took extra care while going to corona-affected Pokhran.

