They step out in lockdown to take provisions to needy
2020-04-11
KOLKATA: At a time, when almost the entire nation has been forced to stay indoors to minimise the spread of novel coronavirus, some have set their own safety aside and stepped out so that the poor, who have lost their livelihood in the lockdown, the stranded migrants and the homeless can get their basic provisions.

 



The “Humans of Patuli” have joined hands to stand by the unorganized-sector workers and daily wage earners in the neighbourhood. “No one should go hungry because of the lockdown. We are crowd-funding to source and distribute rice, dal, soya bean, potato, onion and sanitary napkins among families. In future, we might need to source cooking oil, spices and nutrition for pregnant and lactating mothers,” said one of the organizers, Kasturi Basu, urging all citizens to do their bit and assist their neighbours. The group has already helped out more than 300 families in and around Baishnabghata and Patuli and it looks to send provisions to more.

While this group is catering to the needs of the poor in the city, Debojit Thakur of “Quarantined Student-Youth Network” has been helping out migrants from Bengal and other states stranded in Delhi. The ex-student of Presidency University, along with Bablu Middey, Md Wahid, Parvez Alam and others in Delhi, has been reaching rations to migrants, temporarily stuck in Delhi’s Hauz Rani, Shahpur Jat, Khirki extension, Lajpat Nagar, Chirag Delhi and Sadar Bajar. 

“We are identifying more and more workers stranded in Delhi. We get innumerable SOSes every day. We are trying to reach out to every one with a ration kit, comprising 2kg rice, 2kg potato, 1kg dal, 1kg onion, 300 ml refined oil and a packet of salt, which should last them 10-14 days. We are also giving out baby food and sanitary napkins,” said Thakur, urging citizens to help them raise funds as “it is political and social responsibility to stand beside these people who are fighting a battle not just against the virus, but also against hunger”. Ex-Presidency student Sargam Sharma in Delhi and ex-JU student Nadia Imam in Kolkata are helping him collect and streamline data on migrants. 

Back in the city, Women’s Solidarity Network, along with a few other groups, has been distributing rice, pulses, potato and sanitary napkins to households in Behala to Girish Park to Salt Lake. Feminist platform Dhorshok Tumi-i has created 500 kits containing 500gm sattu, soaps, 2 sachets of ORS and 4 packets of sanitary napkins, for women, mothers and their children. The kits will be handed to various organisations to reach them to the needy.


