Amidst coronavirus outbreak, they chose to ride out the crisis in Italy than head home
2020-03-14
CHENNAI: The streets of Milan are almost deserted. Schools and universities are closed. Theatres, cinemas, museums, pubs, dance schools, game rooms, bingo halls, discos and other clubs are suspended. But, in his home in the city that is facing a complete lockdown, Mithun Thiyagarajan has decided to use the extra time to catch up on reading. For, early on, the 28-year-old architect and industrial designer, who hails from Vadapalani, had made the decision to stay and ride out the crisis rather than head back home, and risk spreading the virus.


“By travelling, I would be putting myself at a higher risk. Worse, I wouldn’t want to be someone responsible that brought the virus into another country with a lower number of cases,” says Mithun, who moved to Milan in 2016 to pursue his masters’ at the Politecnico di Milano. “I am young and may survive it, but without my knowledge what if I do contract it and transmit it to someone who may not survive? That was something I questioned and decided not to do. It seemed a bit selfish. Instead I keep my family informed about what is happening here every day,” says Mitun, whose job-hunting plans have been put on hold for now.

“Even if I do get back to India, how does one decide when to return? I understand this virus may not be eradicated entirely in a few months,” he says, adding that the government is doing all it can to ensure the general public is well taken care of.

“All the workplaces whose employees can work from home do so, others are required to take mandatory precautions. For example, at the pharmacies the queues have lines marked on the floor with one metre spacing and everyone is requested to maintain that gap,” says Mithun. In small stores, there are signs that specify how many people can enter the store at a time. “The calculation is based on the size of the store. A small bakery near my home, which is about 3m long and 3m wide, has calculated that only three people can stand in line at a time. And people respect queues.” The police force also ensures people do not crowd public places.

“Until last Saturday, before Milan and Lombardy was declared to be a red zone, restaurants and pubs were open provided they had only table service and all the tables were 1m away from each other,” says Mithun. “But now many establishments have closed until further notice, which ensures even the ones who do not want to respect the quarantine have less options if they step out.”

The lockdown has had a psychological impact as well. “Initially, there was panic. Staying informed is key. Technology really helps -- at the very least one gets to stay in touch with people they care about to keep oneself warm virtually,” he says, adding that you need to use the time imposed on one positively. “I spend it reading more than I ever did in the recent past,” he says.

In Albignano d’Adda, province of Milan, industrial designer Girish Gopalakrishnan, 27, has also decided to stay put as the project he is working on requires his physical presence. “I am not so worried about COVID-19 as I take all necessary precautions to protect myself,” says Girish, who originally hails from Ramapuram and moved to Italy two years ago.

“Life has become sober here. COVID-19 has really brought Milan down to its knees. No football matches (heart and soul of every Italian), no bars, no shopping. I don’t eat out as much, or meet friends, use self-billing counters when I go to supermarkets and don’t leave home until there is an exigency,” he says. “There is a severe shortage of sanitary masks and gloves but no shortage of any other supplies.”

Since it is also the season of common influenza, the symptoms of which are similar to COVID-19, all precautions are taken. “I was down with fever for two weeks. The doctors just put me on antibiotics and home quarantined me.”

Girish is only worried about family and friends in India. “They blindly follow what is shown on TV irrespective of what the real situation is here. And I don’t know how calm them down,” he says.

