Coronavirus scare: 'They know it’s not safe, but staying off work is a luxury they can’t afford'
2020-03-12
NEW DELHI: Rajesh’s hands are smeared with cement as he balances on the ledge to lay out bricks while his help holds on to a rusted pole. Ask them about coronavirus and they nod in affirmation that they are aware of the dangers of the fast spreading disease. 


They also share how important it is to wash hands and may be wear masks. But the reality is different. While the contractor has provided soap, staying off dirty surfaces is not a choice for these poor labourers.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

“Khaana khaney sey pehley haat sabun sey dho letey hain. Ab sabun rakha hai cotnractor ney. (I wash my hands now with soap before eating my food. Now the contractor has kept soap for us,” said Rajesh who lives in Madanpur Khadar in South Delhi. His help was more candid. “Maam hum labour hain itna dhyaan kahan rakh saktey hain (We are labourers, we cannot take so much care of ourselves.)”

Though aware of the messages on precautions against coronavirus, the poor have additional risks. 

Sunita, who works as a domestic help in Jasola Vihar, bought masks for her two sons. She said how her employers insist that she wash her hands with soap before starting work, since the coronavirus outbreak. Pista Devi (37) from Okhla has to go through similar drill at house where she works as a help. 

Lakshmi (24) is nine months pregnant and has been focussing on washing hands and ensuring that her 4-year-old her son too follows the precautions. Lakshmi admits her husband, a daily-wager, is more exposed to the dangers.

Shashi Kaur of Centre for Advocacy and Research, who works in 20 slums in the Okhla area, said they find that information and awareness is spreading fast but in terms of precautions not everyone has access. “For instance in Okha area there are women who work on segregating waste leather to collect usable pieces. They literally sit amidst waste and say they cannot get up and keep cleaning their hands and face at regular intervals,” he said. 

Nitesh Kumar from Society for Promotion of Youth and Masses, an organisation that operates 75 night shelters for 3000 people, said awareness drive was on. Many daily wagers like rickshaw pullers do not have access to clean water, soap and masks, he said. 

