Third coronavirus case in Hyderabad, man back from Holland tests positive
2020-03-16
HYDERABAD: Telangana reported its third Covid-19 case after test results of a 42-year-old man who had returned from Holland a week ago was confirmed positive by the National Institute of Virology (NIV) Pune on Sunday. 


Coronavirus outbreak live update


"The patient's condition is stable. He is currently at the isolation ward in Gandhi hospital," said a senior official from the state health department.

Authorities have also quarantined three members of his family in the hospital as they showed symptoms of the virus and said they were in the process of identifying and quarantining at least seven to 10 more people who had come in touch with him.

The second positive patient, a 24-year-old woman from Kothagudem who had returned to city from Italy on March 7, was responding to treatment. Three of her contacts too have been traced and have been put under isolation in the hospital. Authorities said she had met a few friends in the city before proceeding to Kothagudem. Now, the health department has drawn up a list of 30 contacts who are being monitored for possible symptoms.


6 rushed to Gandhi with coronavirus symptoms

Earlier on Friday, the state’s first positive case, a 24-year-old software professional, was discharged.

The Telangana government is already on overdrive and on Saturday had shut down most establishments in the state that see large public gatherings. All pubs, gyms and swimming pools that flouted the order were made to down shutters on Sunday.

During the day, the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) team rushed seven persons, including six of a family, from Kothapet to the Gandhi hospital, the nodal centre for treating coronavirus cases.

“All the family members are symptomatic and they have one who had gone abroad some time ago. We are trying to dig out more details about them,” said a health department official.

The seventh suspect, a 50-year-old-woman who had returned from Saudi Arabia 10 days ago, was shifted to the Gandhi hospital from Osmania General Hospital (OGH) on Sunday morning after her condition deteriorated. She had cold, fever and breathlessness, informed hospital authorities.

Also, 28 other contacts of the Kalaburagi patient, a 76-year-old man who became the first man to die of the virus in the country, was currently under watch by the Telangana health authorities.

The condition of one of the suspected patients in the isolation ward deteriorated on Saturday night, but doctors said that he was now responding.

