Tamil Nadu: This test could chart the course of our battle against Covid-19
2020-05-19
CHENNAI: How many people have been infected by Covid-19 in Tamil Nadu or across India? Are there asymptomatic carriers around? Are we nearing the numbers for herd immunity?


The answers, which may influence government policies including lockdowns, lie in the “National Covid Sero Survey”. The antibody tests -- a blood test that determines whether someone has ever been infected with the coronavirus – on samples from across India will be conducted at two central government labs in Chennai. The results will be available by the month-end. “We will be testing samples from 24,000 people across the country -- 400 each in about 60 districts,” said ICMR – National Institute of Research in Tuberculosis director Dr Srikanth Prasad Tripathy. Over the weekend, sample collections have begun in several districts including Tiruvannamalai and Coimbatore.



All samples will be tested at the National Institute of Research in Tuberculosis and ICMR-National Institute of Epidemiology laboratories. The labs will use Covid-19 Kavach Elisa kits developed by the National Institute of Virology, Pune. While real time RT-PCR is the frontline test for clinical diagnosis for the viral infection, these antibody tests are critical for surveillance to understand the proportion of population exposed to infection, an official said. “Unlike the imported kits, these aren’t rapid antibody tests. They are highly specific and scientific ELISA tests for testing large numbers,” he said. The tests are being mass produced by major pharmaceutical companies such as Zydus-Cadila.

For the survey, the country has been divided into zero, low, medium and high prevalence regions. At least 15 districts will be selected from each of these regions. In each district 10 clusters will be identified along with four random start points for samples from households. “Samples will also be drawn from people in containment zones of 10 cities reporting highest number of Covid-19 cases after the survey in 60 districts is complete,” the official said.

More than 20 ICMR Institutions along with surveillance staff from state health departments and WHO, India and National Centre for Disease Control-Integrated Disease Surveillance will be involved in the study. Tiruvannamalai district collector K S Kandasamy said 400 blood samples were collected by a 10-member team from Sanipoondi, Edakhal, Melpallipattu, Melpalur, Pushpagiri, Marudhadu, Devigapuram, Adhanur and Kilnethapakkam villages in the district. “Samples were collected at the door steps of the villagers after their consent. All were wearing PPEs to avoid risks,” he said.

On Saturday, blood samples were collected from 10 locations in Coimbatore district -- Kuniamuthur, Pattunool, Ganapathy, Vilankurichi and Avarampalayam in the city, and Periyanaickenpalayam, Sulthanpet, Kinathukidavu, Pollachi and Mettupalayam. 

