This quarantine centre in Kolhapur is as good as home for 24 families
2020-05-30
KOLHAPUR: Trupti Patil plays with her toddler on the porch of a primary school and doesn’t feel like she has been placed in institutional quarantine.

Patil and her family are among the 24 families, who came from Mumbai about 10 days back, and were asked to stay in the school at Dhamane village in Kolhapur district for a fortnight before they can go home.

Trupti, a school teacher, said her concerns about staying in the facility with a toddler were washed away when she saw the provisions. Clean rooms and washrooms, proper food and milk supply and a kitchen too. “We were living in Mumbai for nine years and as the condition there worsened, we decided to return to the village. At first, when we were told to stay in the school, I was worried. But now, it almost feels like a vacation and we wish we could stay here longer,” she said.

Her happy note resonates with the 81 people staying in this school in Ajara taluka of Kolhapur district. Among those in the quarantine is the village sarpanch Shivaji Lokare, who was stuck in Mumbai during lockdown and could return only this month.

Lokare said there are 79 people from Mumbai and three from Pune in the school. “Being the sarpanch, I know the requirements and during my thirteen-day stay here, I have fixed it. Leakage to the water tank, some repair of the washrooms, plantation of 100 saplings and sanitization of the school has been done with the help of people placed in quarantine here,” he said.

The local villagers donate vegetables, grains, fruits and other materials for us and two villagers, who also returned from Mumbai before the lockdown, cook meals in the school pantry.

For Laxman Phalke, who owns four hotels in Mumbai, his stay in the school revived his childhood memories. “I have been living in Dadar for the last 25 years and used to come to the village only once a year. I came back with my family of eight and am staying here for last seven days. It’s actually great that all of us from this village, who have been living in Mumbai for years, could bond this way,” he said.

All the anxiety and struggle Tukaram Magdum, an LIC agent, felt at his home in Mumbai has disappeared. “I returned because we were scared for our four-month old baby. The happy atmosphere in the school has made the stay enjoyable. We carried out plantation and cleanliness activities in the school where I once studied,” he said.

Amit Bhosale, a member of the Corona Dakshata Samiti in Dhamane village, said the sarpanch calls them if any material is required and it is provided accordingly. 


