This super cop guards our city, feeds the hungry & raises Covid-19 awareness
2020-04-08
HYDERABAD: Beyond his 15 hours of police duty every day, Chandrayangutta’s inspector has been lending a helping hand to the people in his locality amid the lockdown. 

Inspector Rudra Bhaskar, soon after the lockdown, conducted awareness programmes among the people, especially those living in slum areas, about coronavirus. The police officer says work starts at 9am and can stretch up to as late as 12am in case of emergencies.

“The staff along with the inspector went to a few localities to spread awareness about coronavirus. He realised that some people in those localities do not have ration cards and have no clue whom to approach for help,” said John Victor Paul, a constable in Chandrayangutta police station. The inspector bought essential commodities such as rice, dal and vegetables for them with his money. 

“We distributed over 150 kg of essential commodities to some of the people who were in dire need and couldn’t afford anything. In the initial days of the lockdown, there was a huge shortage of masks in medical stores. I sponsored some 400 masks for vegetable vendors and people in need of it,” Bhaskar said. 

As the area covered under his jurisdiction is huge, the inspector could only spread awareness in selected localities. “However, there is a greater need for educating people about the virus. There should be a door-to-door awareness programme carried out covering small localities,” he said. The cop and his staff have also been checking on the elderly people.

“I found out about an 80-year-old woman who has been staying alone in a slum area. Her son is not with her here,” said the inspector. Concerned about how the elderly woman would manage during the lockdown, the inspector bought her grocery for a month. 

Colleagues also recall the generous side of their boss. “Last month, while we all were on duty near a crossroad and had to eat dinner on the roadside, the inspector saw a visibly weak dog. He fed the dog. That was a very kind gesture,” recalled John. “As all the hotels are closed, stray dogs are among the worst hit,” said the inspector.


