Visakhapatnam: This Akshaya Tritiya, order jewels online, receive after lockdown
2020-04-22
VISAKHAPATNAM: With the lockdown extended till May 3 and Akshaya Tritiya on April 26, some jewellers in the city have decided to take orders online and provide digital certificates of possession and provide physical delivery at a later date.


Many consider buying gold on Akshaya Tritiya to be auspicious. Therefore, jewellers are seeking out the online route since their sales have crashed since the imposition of the lockdown.

Speaking to TOI, Rana Uppalapati, business associate at Tanishq, Visakhapatnam said, “Our company was making calls to customers asking them about their well-being. Over the last one week, customers have been enquiring if they could buy even a token amount of gold to mark the auspicious day. Hence, sales for Akshaya Tritiya began on the e-commerce platform on April 18 and will go on till April 27.”

“Once normalcy is restored, customers can either opt to go to the store to pick up their jewellery or get it delivered to their doorstep,” he added.

Ravi Vankayala, proprietor of Ram Jewellers said that Akshaya Tritiya will be celebrated differently this year. He too said that people have been enquiring on the phone about whether they will be able to buy gold on the auspicious day.

“Although it won’t be possible to deliver it (the jewellery) that day, many people have agreed to invest on Akshaya Tritiya. We are happy that we’ll be able to keep the tradition going,” Ravi said. “Since most people purchase gold coins on Akshaya Tritiya, we will block gold in the name of the customer on the prevailing rate on the purchase date,” he added.

M Kaushik, who purchases gold on Akshaya Tritiya said that he has placed an online order for 2grams of gold. “In these gloomy times, I want to observe Akshaya Tritiya. It will give me some hope,” Kaushik said.

Meanwhile, the issue price for the sovereign gold bond has been fixed by the RBI at Rs 4,639 per gram of the yellow metal. The Sovereign Gold Bond Scheme 2020-21-Series I will be opened for subscription from April 20 to 24. RBI said that SGBs will be issued in six tranches from April 20 to September.

