This ‘Akashvani’ warns lockdown violators to get off south Delhi roads
2020-04-29
NEW DELHI: People crowding at a grocery shop in Mehrauli were startled when a loud voice from the sky announced that they were violating social distancing norms. The “Akashvani drone”, as the frontline cops call it, has been keeping an eagle eye on lockdown violators in south Delhi in places where cops are not present.


The drone is a quad-copter fitted with a public address system and a radio that can relay instructions from a distance of 5 km. The device has been the police’s eye in colonies, especially after cops have been asked to avoid direct contact with people to check the spread of coronavirus. The drone system, which was tested in central Delhi earlier this month, can fly over congested lanes without creating any interference in day-to-day activities.

 


 DCP (south) Atul Thakur said the drones have a capacity of carrying a payload of up to 500 gm. “We have fitted a small public address system that can be controlled remotely,” he said. “We use the drone’s public address system to warn violators to stay off the roads. It has been creating a major impact among people,” said a police officer.

The drone is usually flown by an operator who is a pillion rider on a police bike driven by a Covid action team member. The quad-copter flies ahead of the team to spot violators. If anyone is found violating the lockdown order, legal action is initiated, said a police officer.

Cops to deploy Akashvani drones in other parts too

Cops are planning to procure similar Akashvani drones for other parts of the city to patrol congested areas.

“The device is a force multiplier especially while conducting flag marches or keeping an eye on gatherings. By the time our team reaches a place, drones do a major part of the job,” said DCP (central) Sanjay Bhatia.

A senior cop said these drones are very effective especially when the police brass has given a clear instruction to personnel to maintain an optimal force on the ground to prevent being infected. “We have reduced our staff at the barricades to a minimum to ensure no one gets exposed to infection. Here the drone plays an important role,” said a police officer.

