This lockdown has given me a chance to introspect: Gurmeet Choudhary
2020-05-18
Actor Gurmeet Choudhary and wife Debina are keeping themselves busy creatively during lockdown in Mumbai. While the Geet – Hui Sabse Parayi and Punar Vivah actor has taken to reading, both he and Debina are also creating online content for their fans.


“Debina and I are making lots of videos these days and giving our fans and followers lots of content to watch. We are after all actors, so we won’t disappoint anybody and kuchh na kuchh naya unko dete rahenge,” says Gurmeet.
Not perturbed by the lockdown, Gurmeet says the free time has given him an opportunity to know himself better. “This lockdown has taught me to take things as they come. Earlier we were just running after things, school mein pass hone ke peechhe, bade hoke kaam ke peeche bhagna, but we never really had time for ourselves. Now when we have so much time at hand, it’s given me a chance to introspect and understand my own self and what I want from life. I played Ram in Ramayan for two years and I learnt to be a good human being from that character. So the lockdown has taught me to be comfortable with my own self and introspect,” says the actor.

 
Debina Bonnerjee and Gurmeet in their home in Mumbai during lockdown (BCCL)

His first show, Ramayan is being aired again these days, but ask him why it has not been able to match the original Arun Govil-Deepika Chikhallia one in viewership and Gurmeet says, “Both the shows had been made by the same producers and in 2008 when Debina and my show came on air, it became one of the most hit shows. People made Debina and me stars overnight. But one has to understand that the old Ramayana was being telecast on Doordarshan which is a free-to-air channel and is accessible even in the rural areas. Whereas ours is being aired on a GEC, which not everyone may have subscribed to. Besides. DD has such a wide reach, so obviously our viewership can’t match that of DD. Also, so many people announced the airing of the original Ramayana, logon ne tweet kiya which also caught people’s attention. But our show, whenever it was aired, was always the top show.”

And while he and Debina are established actors, the junior lot is facing a lot of problems during lockdown. “Situation no doubt is bad. Debina and I are trying to help whoever is reaching out to us,” says Gurmeet, adding, “If you think about it, an actor who used to earn a thousand bucks and another who earned 2 crores, all are not working these days. Kisi ke paas kaam nahi hai. So I can just say that this too shall pass.”

The actor who’s been seen in quite a few films including Wajah Tum Ho and Paltan, was shooting for another when the lockdown was announced. “I was shooting for my film in Jaipur before the lockdown happened. Half of it has been shot and once things become normal, I guess shooting will resume. I am really looking forward to getting back to work.”

Gurmeet and Debina had adopted two girls from his native village in Bihar in 2017. The couple had also planned on bringing the sisters, whose parents had died, to Mumbai with them. But the plans didn’t materialise. “Yes, they didn’t,” says Gurmeet. “We had got to know about Lata and Pooja in late 2016. So at that time we had wanted to adopt them legally and look after them but their relatives didn’t want that. There were a lot of legalities also involved which was creating a lot of problems. And we didn’t want to create any problem for the girls. So we dropped the idea of giving them our name and instead we are looking after them now. They are in our village in Bihar and are happy. Our main concern was not that they should have our name, our main concern and initiative was too provide for them so that they are well looked after for life. And both Debina and I are doing all that we can do for them and will continue to all our lives.”

The actor who’s been seen in quite a few films including Wajah Tum Ho and Paltan , was shooting for another when the lockdown was announced. “I was shooting for my film in Jaipur before the lockdown happened. Half of it has been shot and once things become normal, I guess shooting will resume. I am really looking forward to getting back to work.

