This coronavirus-hit community has special Italy connect
2020-03-25
JAIPUR: Hundreds of families from Jhunjhunu district work in the hospitality sector in Italy and many of them are still stuck in that country where more than 5,000 people have died of Covid-19.


Three persons of a family — a man, his wife and daughter — who had returned on March 8 tested positive for Covid-19. 

A day after, the district administration imposed a curfew in a 1km periphery of their house on March 18, which is still in effect. 

Dayaram (57), who had gone to Italy 20 years ago in search of a job, said his son is stuck in Italy. 

“He is under a lockdown just like us. I came back on February 1, but my younger son who studies in Italy is still there. I keep checking him over phone. He is safe but I am worried,” said Dayaram. 

When Dayaram went to Italy, he was employed at a restaurant for making pizzas.

 “Now, I work in the meat-packing industry. I had booked my ticket to fly back to Italy on March 15, but I received a call from my employer saying the situation is bad there so I should not go. I have booked my ticket for April 17. I will go there if the situation improves,” said Dayaram, whose elder son works as a waiter at a restaurant. 

Majority of them — hailing from Bagad, Rajgarh, Surajgarh and Lolgarh — belong to the same community — khatik (cloth merchant). 

Bansi Lal (56) returned from Italy on February 6. “My work is to make pizzas. I have been living there for over a decade now. Since I have been staying in that area for a long time, I have learnt their local language. A large number of families from Jhunjhunu work in the hospitality sector there,” said Bansi Lal.

He is worried about his brother’s family, who are still in Italy. 

“He has his own Indian restaurant in Italy. He and his family are quarantined in his house. We pray for their well-being,” said Bansi Lal. 

Health department is keeping all the people of Jhunjhunu who have returned recently under their watch. 

“There are over 160 persons who returned from Italy recently. Most of them have completed their 28 days of home quarantine. We keep monitoring their health to find out if they have any symptoms of Covid-19,” said Dr SK Kaler, principal medical officer, district hospital, Jhunjhunu. 

Dr Kaler further said the situation is returning to normal in Jhunjhunu, yet still they have strengthened surveillance in the area. 

“In 1-km area of the house of the family who tested positive for Covid-19, the curfew is still in effect. We have tested 106 samples, and out of those four have tested positive for the disease. There are a lot of families who live in Italy. We are constantly keeping a watch on their health,” he said. 

