Those in 35 to 55 age group most hit by Covid-19 in Bhopal, reveals data
2020-06-07
BHOPAL: A background analysis of active corona-positive cases reveals that Kamala Nagar, Hanumanganj, TT Nagar and Tilajamalpura are reporting a spurt in Covid-19 cases. A report by Bhopal smart city has listed a police station-wise sample to positive case percentage. Koh-e-Fiza and Hanumanganj have a 6% positive ratio for the total number of cases. In Bagh Sewaniya and Mangalwara, 5% of all tested turned out to be positive.


“High-risk and so called high-risk people, who have met multiple people, have been generally tested for Covid-19. Where the number of positives is less, the sampling is targeted,” explained Bhopal chief medical and health officer (CMHO) Dr Prabhakar Tiwari. 

He explained that Banganga area under TT Nagar has reported a bulk of the cases. “The situation in Banganga is worrying and measures are being taken to contain the spread. Many people have been relocated to other places,” he said.

As for the most the number of cases being in the age group of 35 to 55, Dr Tiwari explained that this is the group which moves out in the open the most. “Overall, the impact of Covid-19 has been to high-risk people. The number of symptomatic and asymptomatic is an indicator. We have found that most people who were positive were asymptomatic,” he added.

The district administration has also followed the new containment area periphery guidelines. A containment area, which was earlier a 2km radius, has been rationalised. Furthermore, containment days have come down from 21 to about 10 days, he said.

Places like Jehangirabad, Aishbagh and Kotwali, which have reported the most number of cases, have a 4% positive ratio. Talaiya, Kamla Nagar, Ashoka Garden, Eitkhedi, Habibganj, Chunabhatti, Avadhpuri, TT Nagar and Shahjahanabad have a 3% ratio.

Of the 1,747 Covid-19 positive cases analysed, the infection ratio among females was 37.32 % while it was 62.68 % among males. Jehangirabad, Aishbagh, Koh-e-Fiza, Mangalwara, TT Nagar, Hanumanganj, Ashoka Garden, Talaiya, Kamla Nagar, Misrod, Shahjehanabad, Bagsevaniya, Kotwali, Nishatpura, Govindpura, Kolar, Habibganj, Tilajamalpura, Gautam Nagar, Station-Bajaria, Bairagarh, Chhola Mandir, Shyamla Hills, Awadhpuri, Piplani, Ratibad, Eitkhedi, MP Nagar, Shahpura, Gautam Nagar, Khajuri Sadak, Chunabhatti, Gandhi Nagar, Berasia, Katara Hills, Sukhi Sewania, Bagh Sewania and Kolar Road have all reported Covid-19 cases.


