Covid-19: Those with jobs in Kuwait worried about return
2020-03-06
MANGALURU: NRIs working in Kuwait are facing problems as Kuwaiti officials haven’t sent the list of identified centres for testing people for Covid-19, which is mandatory for those who want to go back to the Gulf country. Those expats who are in India on leave and want to rush back to Kuwait before March 8, cannot do so, as airfare has increased and almost all flights are full.


On Thursday, 62-year-old Satish B, who has been working in Kuwait for the last 25 years, visited a Gulf Approved Medical Centres Association (GAMCA) approved medical centre in Mangaluru to know how to go about the test. However, he was not able to get any answer for his queries even after waiting for several hours at the centre. 

“The GAMCA centres are clueless on where to conduct tests, and there is no clarity in the circular issued by Kuwait. Meanwhile, I tried to rush back before March 8 but was shocked as airfares for a single journey costs Rs 10,000 which is a two-fold increase and all flights are full. We are caught between the devil and the deep blue sea,” said Satish, who is scheduled to fly back to Kuwait on March 18. 

Three flights operates to Kuwait in a week from Mangaluru International Airport and fly on Monday, Wednesday and Friday.

From Sunday onwards, the Kuwaiti government has made it mandatory for any passenger flying from Philippines, India, Bangladesh, Egypt, Syria, Azerbaijan, Turkey, Sri Lanka, Georgia and Lebanon to complete a medical examination and get a Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) certificate, confirming they are free of Covid-19, before being allowed to enter Kuwait. 

“Like Satish, more than 60 people working in Kuwait, who are on leave, have approached us on Thursday about the Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) certificate. We also went to Wenlock and Lady Goschen Government Hospital on whether they are endorsed to conduct the test, but their answer was negative. We are totally confused on where to conduct test and obtain a certificate,” said a person associated with GAMCA. Surprisingly, GAMCA centres too have not received any official communication from Kuwait.

“We are totally clueless and at the same time worried that any delay to reach our workplace in Kuwait,may result in losing our job. The Kuwaiti and Indian government have to give a clear picture on the test and attestation of the certificate,” said another expat on condition of anonymity.

Wenlock Hospital medical superintendent Dr H R Rajeshwari Devi said that they are only screening patients at Mangaluru International Airport and Mangaluru Port. 

“If we find any symptoms of Covid-19, the samples are sent to government laboratories for testing. However, we are not certified to conduct any test and give certification,” she told TOI.

A ticket booking agency confirmed that there is an increase in air fares to Kuwait.

The Indian Embassy in Kuwait said that the Kuwaiti cabinet is revising its decision of imposing mandatory medical examination and PCR tests in view of concerns raised by embassies from the affected countries, including the Indian Embassy.


