Covid-19: Those sans symptoms sent for home quarantine from Hyderabad airport
2020-03-20
HYDERABAD: The state government shifted 1,165 passengers, who arrived at Rajiv Gandhi International Airport (RGIA) from 11 countries, to quarantine centres set up on the outskirts of the city since Wednesday night. After preliminary examination, six passengers who had flu-like symptoms were sent for further medical tests.


Some passengers resisted attempts of government officials to shift them to quarantine centres, but they finally had to give in after counselling.



Coronavirus in India live updates


Later, after chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao’s media briefing on Thursday, the authorities have decided to send passengers, who did not show any symptoms of Covid-19, to their respective residences for home quarantine.Revenue and health officials of Rangareddy district and Cyberabad police coordinated in shifting the passengers, who arrived at the RGI Airport, to 10 quarantine centres. At a quarantine centre in Rajendranagar, some passengers picked up an argument with police and revenue officials, questioning them about the method of quarantine and lack of facilities.

“We arranged stay at the hostel of an institution. All basic facilities were provided, but some passengers were not happy as they expected star hotel like arrangements. But, we have explained to them that they have to remain at the quarantine facility for 14 days,” a police officer from Rajendranagar police station said. 

Cyberabad police commissioner VC Sajjanar and Rangareddy collector Amoy Kumar initially appealed to the public not to visit the quarantine facilities to meet their family. However later, on the instructions of the CM, arrangements were made to send the passengers who do not have symptoms for home quarantine. “We are sending the passengers without any symptoms of illness for home quarantine,” Sajjanar said. Revenue, health and police personnel would monitor those under home quarantine. 

Based on a complaint lodged at Keesara police station, a case was booked against B Krishna Reddy, ward member of 12th ward in Keesara, for allegedly spreading rumours about coronavirus on a local WhatsApp group. A case was registered under Section 54 of the NDMA Act.


