Those flouting lockdown to face arrest
2020-03-24
Bhubaneswar: The commissionerate police have decided to arrest those who are found on the streets in violation of the ongoing lockdown in the twin cities of Bhubaneswar and Cuttack to contain the spread of coronavirus. The zero tolerance is being adopted in the wake of large-scale violation of the week-long lockdown that started on Sunday. 

“We faced problems as a number of people came out on the streets by defying the lockdown diktat. We have decided to issue vehicle passes only to those persons or employees who are involved in the delivery of essential and emergency services in the twin cities. They should stick the passes on their vehicles so that our personnel will not stop them, thereby preventing contacts between people and police,” commissioner of police Sudhanshu Sarangi said.

Police said emergency service providers should collect the passes from local police stations by Tuesday evening. “We will start making arrests from Wednesday. The (non-pass holders) will not be allowed to move on the streets with their vehicles. We appeal to people to obey the government’s lockdown order or face music,” Sarangi said.

Sources said the state police headquarters is also likely to adopt a tough stance against the lockdown violators in other districts and issue an advisory to the superintendents of police in a day or two. Police said the violators would be booked under Sections 188 (disobedience of government order), 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of disease and dangerous to life) and 270 (malignant act likely to spread infection of disease) and 271 (disobedience to quarantine rule) of the Indian Penal Code.

The Bhadrak district police on Monday arrested a trader for opening his non-essential shop in violation of the lockdown order. A large number of people were also fined for coming out on the roads in Bhadrak.

In a related development, the commissionerate police are regularly calling up senior citizens in the twin cities and requesting them to stay indoors. “We have senior citizen security cells in police stations. The nodal officers of the cells are in touch with the elderly in their localities,” additional commissioner of police Anup Kumar Sahoo said.


