Those discharged from quarantine not given transport from hospitals
2020-04-20
HYDERABAD: People being discarged from quarantine were left in the lurch after hospital authorities and ambulance service refused to provide them transport facility back home.

Covid-19 suspect cases are being provided ambulance services at the time of shifting them to different isolation centres in Hyderabad but they are left to fend for themselves after being discharged, forcing them to arrange transport facility amid strict lockdown.

People discharged from quarantine at places including Charminar Hospital and Gandhi Hospital told TOI that they were told to return home sans any transport facility.

“We were told to go back home and were not provided any transport facility from Chest Hospital, Erragadda. It took me hours to reach home with my baggage after walking a long distance on foot. First, I had to walk to Gandhi Hospital to take my bike, which was parked at time of admission and then I returned home,” one of the quarantined told TOI, after spending 18 days in quarantine and whose test came negative.

A similar case came to fore at Charminar on Saturday night, when a family, including children, was seen waiting anxiously at the bus stop to return home at about 11:30 pm. The family made all possible efforts to convince hospital and ambulance service authorities to drop them home but were not helped.

Taking strong exception against the poor facilities in hospitals provided to the patients and discharged people, AIMIM corporator Mohammed Mustafa Ali Muzaffar alleged that Health Department had failed to ensure basic amenities for people in quarantine centres.

“A family from Kishanbagh area was discharged Saturday night at about 11:30 pm from Charminar Hospital and were sitting helplessly at the bus stop in search of any vehicle. Despite this, they didn’t get transport facility and finally set out towards Shahalibanda where all of them stopped and could not continue. I took them in my vehicle and dropped them home,’’ saidMuzaffar.


