Those infected again did not pass on coronavirus: Study
2020-05-14
PUNE: A study in China has shown that Covid-19 patients who tested positive after being discharged did not infect immediate contacts despite symptoms emerging again. 


Relapse of Covid-19 has been a concern worldwide. South Korea has 382 people (as of May 10) who tested positive again after being declared “recovered”. There has been a case from Maharashtra as well. A 76-year-old man from Aurangabad tested positive 11 days after being discharged from hospital. Fortunately, his relatives were found free of infection the second time.

Now, researchers from the Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases Research Laboratory of Shenzhen Third People’s hospital, who analysed the correlation between lab parameters, treatment and time for virus recrudescence, have suggested additional measures to confirm actual recovery in Covid-19 patients.

Their study of 172 Covid-19 patients, published by the Oxford University Press on behalf of the Infectious Diseases Society of America, found that 25 of them had tested positive again within seven to 10 days of discharge.

The patients earlier had symptoms of fever (68%) and cough (60%). Twenty-four of them were registered as non-severe during first onset. During readmission, only eight (32%) had mild cough.

The Chinese study points at a fluctuation between improvement in clinics and “full recovery”. “It is probable that two negative RT-PCR tests — 24 hours apart — may not be sufficient for clearance,” the study states. Instead, the experts told TOI two PCR tests — spread over 48 hours — may be needed to confirm if a patient is clear of the virus. But none of the 25 patients who tested positive again spread the virus. “SARS-Cov-2 transmission between these patients and close contacts did not happen,” said Dr Yanchao Pan, one of the authors of the study.

Pan recommended repeated RT-PCR testing separated by prolonged durations — such as 48 hours — before discharging.

Another Chinese group that studied recurrence suggested strict supervision for at least two weeks after discharging a Covid-19 patient. They added a serologic examination of SARS-CoV-2-specific IgM antibody be carried out to detect the virus.

 Epidemiologist Maria Van Kerhove, part of the WHO’s Health Emergencies Program, recently told the BBC that lungs eject dead cells as they heal from infection. “These are fragments of the lungs that are actually testing positive. It is not the infectious virus, it’s not reactivation. It is part of the healing process,” she said.

In the case of the 76-year-old Aurangabad man, doctors said he suffered shortness of breath, while walking and climbing stairs, on both occasions. 

Physician Padmaja Saraf said the patient, with a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, was being given anti-virals and is expected to recover.

Aurangabad municipal health officer Nita Padalkar said the virus is sometimes absent from nasal discharge, which could why he had tested negative. Padalkar said intermittent shedding of the virus could be the reason why he tested positive again.

Prakash Doke, former state director of health services, said viral load and test sensitivity need to be considered. “We have not seen too many such cases in India. More studies need to be done to determine the reasons behind recurrence,” he said. 


(With inputs from Arpita Sharad in Aurangabad)


