Three days after delivering baby, woman tests positive for Covid-19
2020-05-05
BAREILLY: A 28-year-old woman who gave birth to a baby on Friday at a private hospital in Bareilly has tested positive for Covid-19.

After the health department received her test report from a private laboratory on Monday, the woman was shifted to a Covid-19 level 2 hospital. However, the newborn’s test for novel coronavirus will be conducted after four days.

Besides, staffers at two city-based private hospitals where two novel coronavirus patients were admitted have been quarantined.

The woman, a native of Faridpur town of Bareilly, delivered a baby boy at a private hospital in Rampur Garden here. The hospital authorities had sent her samples for Covid-19 test to a private laboratory. The report arrived late on Sunday night.

“The doctors who performed the caesarean section claimed that they had donned PPE kits during the operation. However, as there is a risk that hospital staff may have come in contact with the woman after the surgery, we have disinfected the hospital and quarantined staff here only. Though the condition of the woman and her newborn is stable, they were shifted to Covid-19 level 2 hospital because the nursery facility is unavailable at Covid-19 level one hospital,” said Dr Ranjan Gautam, district surveillance officer.

He added that all 65 samples were tested negative for Covid-19 on Monday.

Officials said they are investigating how the patient contracted the virus and the number of people with whom she came in contact with. Officials have quarantined eight family members of the patient's family.

A team led by district epidemiologist, Dr Meesam Abbas, on Monday collected 38 samples of the private hospital’s staff where the woman had delivered the baby. The hospital staff was quarantined at the hospital premises only after it was disinfected. 

Meanwhile, a 24-year-old youth who is a resident of Pilibhit and had undergone surgery at a private hospital in Bareilly’s Pilibhit Bypass was tested positive at a private laboratory. Eight patients who were undergoing treatment at this hospital were shifted to a private medical college on Monday. Besides, eight members of this hospital were quarantined at a 300-bed hospital and their samples were collected for novel coronavirus test.


