Coronavirus outbreak: Private airline stops three Gujaratis at Chinese airport
2020-01-29
PALANPUR/VADODARA/RAJKOT: Three youngsters from Gujarat studying at Nanchang in east China’s Jiangxi province are stranded there as they were allegedly not allowed to board a flight by a private airline suspecting that they could be infected with coronavirus.


The youngsters, one of them who is from Palanpur, made a video seeking support of Indian government and the ministry of external affairs.

The youngsters have claimed that they were not allowed to board a flight from Nanchang’s airport by manager of Spring Airlines on the ground that their body temperature was high.

“We were scheduled to board a flight to Bangkok from where we had a connecting flight to New Delhi and later to Ahmedabad,” said Amit Moradia. They claimed they were made to undergo thorough check-up at the airport as they had to pass through an infrared machine that detects body temperature.

“Our body temperature was slightly higher than 37 degrees, approximately 37.3 degrees. We were stopped at the airport and had to undergo check-up for which we had given them written permission,” he said, adding even the tests confirmed that they were not infected due to the virus.

“Body temperature of all Indians is considered normal at 37.5 degrees. Our body temperature was well within the range and even the tests had proved that,” he said, adding that the problem started when they went to collect their boarding passes.

Navneet Barot, whose father is a police constable in Palanpur, said, “The airline manager did not allow us to board the flight even as our test were negative.” The trio had to cancel their tickets of their connecting flight to Delhi and Ahmedabad.

“We are in touch with the Indian embassy but the situation at Nanchang worsening. On Monday, there were 7-8 coronavirus positive which have increased to 18 within 24 hours. At the same time, while our families in India are worried, we don’t have enough food and water stock,” he said.

Meanwhile, around 23 students including four from Junagadh and 11 from Rajkot are expected to return home soon while some have returned safely.

Monarch Savaliya of Junagadh who returned on Monday, said, "The situation in China is grim. We were ordered to return to India, but there was no way we could arrange our flight so fast. Junagadh's BJP leader Kirit Patel helped facilitate our return within just three hours after speaking with chief minister Vijay Rupani."

Four more students from Junagadh - Deep Vaishnani, Brijesh Davra, Ruchi Viroja and Shivam Maradiya, who are studying in Shanghai and Wuhan, are expected to return on Wednesday, official sources said.

Meanwhile, parents of a student from Botad, Samir, who studies in a university in Wuhan, are spending anxious moments as he is still stranded there. His mother is a teacher in Tatam village.

