Three Vid cities now have 100-plus Covid cases each
2020-05-17
Nagpur: With seven more cases recorded in a day, Amravati crossed 100-mark of Covid-19 positive cases on Saturday and became third city in Vidarbha to have more than 100 cases. Nagpur which reported its 5th Covid-19 death on Saturday has the highest at 341 followed by Akola where two women tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday taking total number to 220.Thirty eight more patients were released in Yavatmal on Saturday under revised guidelines. Within a day, Yavatmal’s number of confirmed positive Covid-19 cases came down from 45 to seven which technically upgraded the district into Orange Zone from Red. Amravati released six patients and five were discharged in Nagpur taking total number of recovered patients to 49 on Saturday. Recovery rate of Vidarbha continued to surge for the fourth day and crossed 60% mark. Many more patients are likely to be discharged in next three days. Nagpur recorded it’s 5th Covid-19 death on Saturday in the form of 65-year-old patient admitted in GMCH Covid Hospital. Doctors said he was admitted on May 13 as a patient of Severe Acute Respiratory Illness (SARI). A resident of Khalasi Nagar in Gaddigodam, he was a patient of diabetes and hypertension too. As his condition deteriorated on May 15, he was put on ventilator support. But he died on Saturday morning. Two women family-members of a SARI patient from Jawahar Nagar and three policemen deployed in Mominpura for bandobast also tested positive.Amravati, which reported its first case on April 4 last, took 44 days to reach the three-figure mark. Beginning with Hathipura deceased on April 4, its 25th case came 24 days later on April 28. However, the 50 was reached in next four days on May 2 and the 75th five days later on May 7. The century was reached this evening. Shock and panic gripped the city, which went into a 40-hour Janata Curfew from 3 pm on Saturday as the news went viral on social media. With new areas reporting cases, people are fearing community outbreak but are still giving a go-by to maintaining distancing in public places.Police were in a shock when a 48-year-old DB squad in-charge of Gadgenagar police station tested positive. Official sources said that this Paradise Colony resident complained of back pain, cough, cold and fever after having played a major role in removing two Habib Nagar cases to Covid hospital on May 14. He was taken to a private hospital on VMV Road where doctors referred him to Covid hospital for swab collection.Meanwhile, his family members brought him to Nagpur on Friday while his swab tested positive on Saturday. Health administration launched containment and contact tracing efforts in Paradise Colony as well as at Gadgenagar police station. A new case, the fifth one, came from Qureshi Nagar in Badnera when a 23-year-old driver tested positive days after returning from Nainital. His 45-year-old mother has been put in isolation.Amravati’s count of 101 comprises 13 deaths, 62 recovered, two in Nagpur for treatment and 24 active cases in Covid ward here.Panic also gripped Namuna Lane no 4 residents here when a suspect died at Covid hospital today. Admitted there on May 14 for cough, cold and fever, he breathed his last at 3 am today. “We are awaiting his swab report,” said an.official.Relief for Yavatmal: Yavatmal is set to come out of Red Zone as the total active positive patients in the GMC isolation ward has come down to seven on Saturday. There were 98 positive patients so far of whom 91 are now recovered and discharged.On Friday, there were 45 active positive patients of whom 38 were discharged on Saturday. However, three of them will be kept in the institutional quarantine and the remaining 35 in home quarantine for another 14 days.Initially there were patients from a pocket of the city which was sealed by the administration. Then it was Ner with three positive patients and Dhanora of Umarkhed with one positive patient. “We took quick steps to declare the Walisaheb Nagar in Ner and village Dhanora as containment areas,” said the district collector MD Singh.“We have collected 76 high and low risk contacts from Ner and 68 from Umarkhed and their swab samples were sent to Nagpur. All of them now tested negative,” said the CS Dr Tarangtushar Warey.Meanwhile, the new born boy baby of the positive mother has tested negative on Saturday. Both the mother and the new born are keeping good health and they are kept in the special isolation ward, informed the HoD of Gynaecology department Dr Rohidas Chauhan.