Three-month-old girl among Gorakhpur coronavirus survivors
2020-06-09
GORAKHPUR: A three-month-old baby was among those won the battle against novel coronavirus (Covid-19). Little Arham, a resident of Basti, tested positive for the disease at BRD Medical College in April. The baby was put under observation and was breastfed by her mother.

“The baby’s mother tested negative for the virus. Under the constant supervision of our doctors and treatment, the baby recovered within 14 days. She was discharged on April 27,” said principal of BRD Medical College Ganesh Kumar.

As metros like Maharashtra and New Delhi struggle to contain the spread of the deadly virus, a state like Uttar Pradesh – with far fewer infrastructural resources – seems to be making an impressive headway in its fight against novel coronavirus.

Many district officials credited the state’s success to the efforts of its CM Yogi Adityanath. A seer-turned-politician, Yogi who has been a five-time MLA from Gorakhpur Lok Sabha constituency.

Little Arham wasn’t the only ‘Covid miracle’ which was reported from Gorakhpur – Yogi’s home turf.

A 49-year-old man, Babulal, came to BRD Medical College after returning from Delhi, where he tested positive for novel coronavirus (Covid-19). He was admitted to Delhi’s Safdarjung Hospital after he suffered a cardiac arrest. He later also tested Covid-19 positive. However, the hospital discharged him days later and he returned home.

When Babulal experienced breathing problems a few days later, his family took him to private a hospital in Gorakhpur, from where he was referred to BRD Medical College. He was admitted to the medical college on April 26 and was the first Covid-19 case to be reported from Gorakhpur. “He was kept in an isolation ward. He recovered in a month, after undergoing treatment at our hospital and being monitored by our doctors,” said the principal. 

District officials said that the CM himself monitored the progress of Arham and Babulal’s treatment.

Yogi is known have motivated health workers and other first responders, while inspecting healthcare facilities in person at regular intervals. 

The testing capacity of the state has increased by over 15,000 per day in the state and till date more than 4 lakh Covid-19 tests have conducted. All district hospitals have been equipped with TrueNat machines and the number of novel coronavirus patients returning home after treatment has increased.

