Three-yr-old among 15 new Covid-19 cases
2020-05-07
Kanpur: Fifteen more persons including a three-year-old child tested positive for coronavirus in the district on Wednesday, taking the number of such cases in the city to 284. One corona suspect woman patient died while in yet another relief, 15 infected persons were tested negative in their second report. 

Chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Ashok Shukla said that sample reports received from Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi Memorial medical college stated 14 persons to be positive while KGMU report declared one person to be positive. Of the total 15 fresh cases, a three-year-old kid of a textile trader of Shiv Katra in Chakeri, has been tested positive, besides it included, four members of a family and 10 persons from hotspot areas of the city. 

“Child’s sample tested positive at the COVID 19 lab of Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi memorial medical college. This was probably for the second time, when a three-year-old child has been tested positive for Covid -19. Earlier, three-year-old daughter of a policeman of Raipurwa police station was tested positive. She is undergoing treatment at Kanshiram Trauma Centre in Ramadevi area in Chakeri,” said Dr Shukla. 

The child is being admitted to the COVID-19 ward of Lala Lajpat Rai hospital, he added. 

According to him, the child’s five family members had tested positive in the past few days. 

He further stated that also there is a positive news wherein 15 positive persons have been tested negative in their second sample report. “We are in the process of discharging them soon,” he said. 

The COVID-19 count in the city is now 284 though the number of active cases remained 248 while 49 people have been discharged after recovery. Meanwhile, a 22-year-old corona suspect girl from the Katherua village of the Bidhnoo died at Covid -19 hospital of Lala Lajpat Rai hospital on Wednesday morning. 

The family members of the deceased have been placed under home quarantine. She had been suffering from tuberculosis for which her family members approached CHC Bidhnoo on Tuesday evening after she complained of breathlessness. Later, she developed high-grade fever with respiratory illness upon which she was taken to LLR hospital on late Tuesday night. The hospital put her on ventilator at Neuro Science Centre, however the girl died on Wednesday morning. The body was shifetd to mortuary. 

According to health department sources, doctors at LLR hospital have collected the nasal and throat swab samples of the deceased and the same have been sent to laboratory for conducting the test. Later, the authorities santized the ICU of the Neuro Science Centre, besides sent the girl’s family for compulsory home quarantine. 

The medical teams are also taking precautions in the Katherua village area. “The body of the deceased is preserved at morgue, after ascertaining the reports only the authorities will decide upon handing over the body to the kin as per the Covid protocol,” the CMO added.


