Three more test positive, Kolkata’s Covid-19 count now at seven
2020-03-23
KOLKATA: The city’s Covid-19 patient count jumped to seven on Sunday, with parents of the 22-year-old Ballygunge youth — who had tested positive on Friday — being detected positive, along with their domestic help.

All three, who had been quarantined at the Chittaranjan National Cancer Research Institute in New Town, have been admitted to the Beliaghata ID Hospital. Six of Kolkata’s Covid-19 patients are admitted at the Beliaghata hospital, while one is under treatment at AMRI Hospital, Salt Lake.

According to state health department sources, samples of the three were tested after they felt uneasy. On testing positive, they were immediately shifted to the hospital. Nine other members of the family remain quarantined at the New Town facility.

An atmosphere of fear had enveloped the youth’s Ballygunge neighbourhood, as he had apparently been moving about in the area since he arrived from the UK on March 13. His father, who owns a sanitary hardware store in south Kolk-ata that was sealed on Friday, continued to visit his shop, along with other family members, sources said. Alarmed neighbours even lodged a complaint against them at Kalighat police station after the youth tested positive.

MMiC Debashish Kumar, who is a neighbour and the local councillor, said several other families will be screened, since the domestic help also worked at those homes.

Meanwhile, concerns that the 57-year-old Covid-19 patient — the fourth to test positive in Kolkata, on Saturday — had been infected locally persisted, as the man’s travel history revealed that he had been to Chhattisgarh on a trip with his wife last week, within days of meeting his son, who visited him from the US. 

While unconfirmed sources claimed that the 57-year-old patient’s son had visited his Dum Dum residence, local councillor Keya Das said this was unverified. Even as the man’s condition remained critical at AMRI Hospital, Salt Lake, concerns have been raised about the health of frontline medical staff at the hospital who treated him before detection and continue to be in service. Seven from the Dum Dum neighbourhood, where the man lives, have been quarantined, including his wife. 

The Covid-19 patient had returned from Bilaspur in Chattisgarh on March 13 and apparently visited a mall in north Kolkata on March 8, according to neighbours. Neither he nor his wife showed any symptoms till he felt unwell on March 14 and took a rickshaw to a nursing home in Nagerbazar, where he got a blood test done. His condition continued to worsen eventually, leading to his AMRI admission on March 16. 

The possibility of the patient meeting his US-returned son has not been ruled out, said Gopa Pandey, chairperson-in-council (health), South Dum Dum Municipality. “We have come to know that the youngster had stayed at another flat on Jessore Road, owned by his father,” she said.

Since he had not been detected at the time of his admission to AMRI Hospitals on March 16, doctors and nurses who treated him need to be quarantined immediately, felt experts. While hospital authorities maintained that the medical staff, including the treating doctor, were under regular screening, they continued to be on duty. Several senior medics felt it could be risky unless they had been wearing personal protective equipment like masks and gloves, which appear unlikely.

“They could be allowed to work only if they wore an N95 mask, cap, gloves and a gown while attending to him. It is unlikely, which makes it mandatory for them to be sent on quarantine,” said a doctor at the hospital.

Belle Vue Clinic consultant and infectious diseases expert Rahul Jain said it could be risky, since a hospital has patients with compromised immunity. Other than the doctors and nurses, patients, too, are vulnerable. They should be isolated now,” Jain said.

An AMRI statement claimed that the hospital had taken “proper protective measures for its doctors and frontline healthcare workers who were dealing with the patient”. A hospital source added that they had no symptoms yet and were “not on shift duty on Sunday”, but were attending to their duties.

Virologist Amitabha Nandy said the chances of the man contracting the virus during his travel to Chhattisgarh couldn’t be ruled out. “Since the number of patients is on the rise, the possibility of a transmission during the journey is high. The chances of his getting the virus from his son, in case he had met him, are equally high,” Nandy said. 

Neighbours of the Covid-19 patient at South Dum Dum were also worried about the fact that the latter’s domestic help had continued to work at the house till he was found positive. She had attended other households as well and she might have infected others, too, they feared. “The area is a congested one and transmission can’t be ruled out. His wife on Sunday agreed to go for a test at the Beliaghata ID Hospital. We are looking for the rickshaw puller, while the man who conducted blood tests and the maid have been quarantined,” said Das.

The Covid-19 patient owns another flat on Jessore Road near Nagerbazar and his neighbours at the apartment building are scared. “I have heard about a case in Dum Dum, but I did not know that the man had a flat in our apartment. Although he did not come frequently here, we are not sure if he had come to this building. But we are extremely worried,” said Shyamal Mandal, a resident of the apartment.

South Dum Dum Municipality has at least nine people with a history of foreign travel in recent weeks. Four of them have returned from London and are residents of Kazipara and Dumdum Park. Two have come back from Bahrain and two from the UAE. “We have seven in Dum Dum municipality who have a very recent foreign travel history. Unfortunately, some of them went into quarantine only after we informed the police and they asked them to do so,” said Barun Datta, vice-chairman, Dum Dum Municipality.


