Three east Delhi apartments and five mohallas sealed, 5,000 quarantined
2020-04-08
NEW DELHI:Eight Covid-19 containment zones were created in east Delhi on Tuesday and over 5,000 residents placed under quarantine after eight positive cases were reported from some localities.


It is part of a micro-level plan to contain a local outbreak which otherwise, authorities fear, may infect tens of hundreds of people.

Mansara Apartment in Vasundhara Enclave, Mayur Vihar-1’s Vardhman and Mayurdhwaj Apartments in Patparganj were sealed. So were 39 houses in Kalyanpuri, Gali No. 9 of Pandav Nagar, two areas in Krishan Kunj and one in Khichripur.

Containment zones: Supply of essentials to be ensured

The containment zones were created based on an order issued by the office of the district magistrate East district.

No person can walk out of these containment zone or make any movement outside their houses for any purpose. Outsiders are not allowed to enter these zones which are guarded by police. The residents are under strict monitoring to ensure no one violates the containment orders. FIRs will be lodged against people who violate the containment orders, according to sources.

The decision to create the containment zones was taken by the district authorities in consultation with health authorities, Delhi Police and officials of the municipal corporation. The containment zones would be under surveillance of health officials and health authorities will be regularly reviewing Covid-19 situation and the health situation of the people in the containment zones. The decision for lifting of the containment zone will rest on the reports of the health authorities.

Directions were issued to officials concerned of food and supply department, East Delhi Municipal Corporation, Drugs Control among others to ensure supply of essential items to the people living inside the containment zones. “The nodal officers will be ensuring supply of food and groceries, supply of medicines and medical equipment, banking facilities, maintenance of hygiene and other needs of these residents,” the order stated.

Officials have been deployed at the entry points of all the containment zones. Sources said that the contact numbers of the nodal officers have been shared with the residents who can order essential items which will be delivered to them by select staff deployed for the purpose. “Vegetable and milk vendors would be arranged nearby the zones so that needs of the residents can be met,” said sources.


