Three fresh cases of Covid-19 in Uttarakhand, all had returned from other states
2020-05-14
DEHRADUN: Three new Covid-19 cases were reported in Uttarakhand on Wednesday, taking the state’s tally to 72. One coronavirus patient recovered and was discharged from a hospital in Nainital, making the total number of active cases 24 in the state. 

Among the persons who tested positive is a 52-year-old woman from Dehradun had gone to Delhi to visit her son earlier this year, according to the health department. She also underwent a kidney stone surgery in Delhi’s GB Pant hospital in March. Her family said that the patient hadn’t stepped out of her home in the last two months during the coronavirus lockdown.

“The patient and her son, who lives in Raipur area, were coming back to Dehradun in a private taxi on May 11. Our team collected their sample at Asharodi check post at Dehradun-Uttar Pradesh border. It was part of our random sampling,” said Dr Dinesh Chauhan, the district nodal officer of Covid-19 pandemic.

The sample was tested at Government Doon Medical College (GDMC) and the patient, along with the son and other family members, were shifted to Doon hospital on Wednesday afternoon.

In another case, a 27-year-old youth was found to be Covid-19 positive in Almora. He had recently travelled to his village in Ranikhet from Gurugram. He is had been housed at a quarantine facility in the village and was moved to the district hospital late on Wednesday.

The third case reported was from Haldwani. A resident who returned home from Amravati district of Maharashtra tested positive for the infection on Wednesday.

Meanwhile, the state has conducted 10,792 tests so far. Around 300 samples were sent for testing on Wednesday. As many as 2,935 people are at quarantine facilities across Uttarakhand. The state has reported a 65 per cent recovery rate, with 24 active cases at present. Nine of the active cases are in Dehradun and Udham Singh Nagar each, two in Haridwar and Nainital and one each in Almora and Uttarkashi.


