Three-month-old child, three others test Covid-19 positive in Varanasi
2020-06-06
VARANASI: Four more persons including a three-month-old child were tested positive for Covid-19 in Varanasi on Friday. With the detection of new coronavirus cases, the total number of positive cases has reached to 219 in the district, while 126 of these have been cured and discharged so far. Presently, there are 88 active corona cases in the district.

Meanwhile, the district reported one more Covid-19 related death. District magistrate Kaushal Raj Sharma said that the person, who was admitted to the BHU hospital for some health problems, had died on June 1 after which his sample was collected and sent for testing to BHU lab. Till the reports were received the body was kept in mortuary. The reports of his sample received on Friday confirmed coronavirus infection taking the total number of Covid-19 casualties to five in the district. 

A total of 68 test results were received from BHU lab on Friday. Among the four positive cases, the child, who had arrived here from Mumbai by train, is a native of Phoolpur area. While another infected persons is a 53-year-old person, a resident of Anand Nagar colony in Sarnath area, who had arrived from Prayagraj. Another newly-detected case is a 26-year-old resident of Bari Piyari locality of Chowk area, while the another infected person is a 26-year-old youth, a resident of Dullahpur in Cholapur area. He worked as a JCB operator in Mumbai.

According to the DM, Chitrasenpuram, Anand Nagar colony, and Dullahpur have been declared as new hotspots in the district. The total number of hotspots has now increased to 112, while five hotspots have been turned into green zones on Friday. So far 44 hotspots have come under green zone. The total number of active hotspots is 68 including 26 in orange zone and 42 in red zone.

On Friday, 132 sample were collected in the district. So far 6,451 samples have been collected out of which the results of 5,889 samples have been received. The results of 562 samples are awaited.

Meanwhile, as many as 16 more persons including a doctor were tested positive for Covid-19 in Azamgarh district on Friday. A migrant worker, confirmed coronavirus positive, a native of Deedarganj area died on Thursday night. 

According to the Azamgarh CMO Dr AK Mishra, the total number of positive cases rose to 141 in the district. As many as 25 patients have so far recovered from illness, while three persons died. Presently there are 113 active cases of Covid-19 in Azamgarh.


