Three Jamaat men, all asymptomatic, test positive for Covid-19 in Kheri
2020-04-06
Bareilly: Three members of Tablighi Jamaat, who had taken part in the recent religious congregation in Delhi’s Nizamuddin Markaz, have tested positive for Covid-19 in Lakhimpur Kheri’s Dhaurahra on Saturday night.

They were part of a 12-member group from Bihar who were earlier found staying in a mosque in Dhaurahra area of the district. Two of them are aged 19 while the third is 62 years. SDM Sunandu Sudhakaran said that all of them were asymptomatic and 23 teams were formed to trace their contacts.

The Jamaat members were actually found on March 31, but they had then claimed that they were migrant workers and were only returning from Delhi for Bihar. They were separately quarantined by SDM at a shelter home after conducting medical check-up. Three days later they admitted to have visited the Jamaat meeting in Delhi. Thereafter, their samples were sent for Covid-19 testing on Friday and reports of three of them were found positive.

On Sunday, chief medical officer (CMO) Manoj Agarwal said, “All the three positive cases have been sent to our community health centre in Behjam where they would be kept in isolation. The other nine members of their group will be under observation for the next few days. Some people were home quarantined and their medical examination was also conducted by our team. The locals have been alerted and advised to call us in case anyone develops Covid-19-like symptoms - among them or their family members.”

SDM Sudhakaran told TOI, “We have deployed 23 teams comprising of health and administrative officials to trace the people who may have come in contact with these positive cases. The mosque and the area within a radius of one kilometre were sanitised in my presence. Police are putting all efforts to find out whether other Jamaat men are staying elsewhere in the area. Local residents have been advised to immediately share information about those who came here after lockdown was announced. We have also conducted meetings with local religious heads and requested them to cooperate with us.”

On Sunday, five more Jamaat men were found staying in a house in Amritaganj village under the limits of Kheri police station. The five men along with the house owner have been quarantined and they will be booked under the relevant sections for violating “quarantine norms”.


