Bareilly: Three samples test negative for novel coronavirus
2020-02-07
BAREILLY: Samples of three persons who had travelled to China in January were tested negative for novel coronavirus (nCov-2019). The health department received the test report on Thursday. Of three cases, two were from Bareilly and one from Pilibhit. Besides, the health authorities in Bareilly collected two samples of a mother-son duo on Thursday.

Of the two samples which were collected from Bareilly, one person is a city-based industrialist who returned from China on January 12. Officials said another person, who is a native of a village under Sheeshgarh police station in Bareilly district, is an agriculturist in New Zealand and returned to India on January 17. His flight had a changeover in China. Similarly, a 55-year-old woman from Pilibhit’s Puranpur had travelled to Canada but she had to switch her flight in China.

The health department had collected their samples for coronavirus test on Tuesday after these three persons had fever and cough following their return to India. The immigration department had provided a list of 47 persons to health authorities in Bareilly who had travelled to China since January. Health teams had contacted them and checked if they have any flu-like symptoms.

Additional chief medical officer, Bareilly, Dr Ranjan Gautam, said, “Out of 47 persons, the travel history of 17 persons to China has exceeded 28 days and there is no risk from them. The health department has to monitor a patient who returned from China for a period of 28 days. Of 30 persons who visited China last month, we took samples of four while the rest of them are fine. Two persons were tested negative for novel coronavirus while we have sent sample to Lucknow for test of a woman and her son on Thursday. Their test reports will arrive soon. No person from Bareilly went to China's Wuhan and the situation is under control.”

Officials said a woman and her son whose samples were collected and sent to Lucknow on Thursday had returned from Melbourne but their flight halted at China for nearly half-an-hour.

Chief medical officer, Pilibhit, Dr Seema Agarwal, said, “We had collected sample of a woman in Puranpur and she tested negative for novel coronavirus. There is no other suspected case in Pilibhit district.”

Meanwhile, the health department in Bareilly will conduct a mock drill on novel coronavirus on Friday to create awareness among public. The health officials have also roped in a few private medical colleges in Bareilly to conduct awareness programme.


