Coronavirus: Three with severe co-morbid conditions succumb, Pune toll up to eight
2020-04-08
PUNE: Three critically ill patients succumbed to novel coronavirus-associated acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) at the state-run Sassoon General Hospital in the city on Tuesday, taking the city’s Covid-19 toll to eight.


Two of the deceased persons had underlying medical conditions, including diabetes and hypertension. The other was a patient of chronic kidney disease. All the three were being treated on ventilator support.

 

A 67-year-old man, a resident of Parvati Darshan, was admitted to the Sassoon hospital on April 1 after he complained of breathlessness. “He is a known patient of diabetes and hypertension. He had developed ARDS and was on ventilator support,” said the hospital’s dean, Ajay Chandanwale.

Another victim was a 65-year-old man, a resident of Lumbininagar in Sangamwadi. He was admitted to the hospital on April 4 after he complained of difficulty in breathing. He had co-morbid conditions, including hypertension and diabetes. He later developed ARDS and was on ventilator support.

The third victim was a 57-year-old resident of Bhavani Peth. He was a pastor and a patient of renal failure.

“He was shifted to our hospital from a private hospital five days ago. His condition was critical and was on ventilator support,” Chandanwale said.

He said, “All the three patients had tested positive for Covid-19. Their infection is not linked with international travel, nor is there any traceable source of infection in terms of proximity to known infected persons. The investigation is on.”

In most of the Covid-19 casualties in Pune, the victims were people from low-income group and slum-dwellers. None of them had any recent history of foreign travel or any other traceable source of contracting the contagion. Most had some or the other co-morbid conditions.

Three persons, including two slum-dwellers, succumbed to the novel coronavirus-associated complications on April 4 and 5. The city’s first Covid-19 death was on March 30, when a 52-year-old man, a resident of Thane staying at his in-laws’ home in Erandwane, succumbed to the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) infection-associated complications at Deenanath Mangeshkar Hospital. He had underlying medical conditions, including diabetes and hypertension.

A 50-year-old woman from Raviwar Peth was Pune’s second Covid-19 casualty when she succumbed to Covid-19-associated ARDS at the state-run Sassoon General Hospital on April 2. She had no other underlying medical conditions.

