Kerala: Three mysterious Covid-19 cases put authorities in a quandary
2020-05-26
KOZHIKODE: Rise in Covid-19 cases, the sources of which are yet to be ascertained, has become a headache for the district administration and health department authorities in Kannur.

There are at least three complicated cases and expert panels have been formed to study them separately. One is that of a woman in Dharmadom, another a woman in the tribal colony in Karikkottakkari and the third one is a man who has been admitted to the Pariyaram Medical College after he fell from a tree. The tribal woman was tested positive for Covid-19 after she was admitted to the Kannur General Hospital for delivery. She had not contacted anyone having symptoms of Covid-19 or gone out. She has been admitted to the Pariyaram Medical College after she developed severe throat pain and fever and was later tested positive.

“We have not yet succeeded in identifying the source. The Kannur General Hospital where she was admitted has been infected and some staff have been sent to quarantine. This could be the source of infection,” said Sheeja Sebastian, president of Ayyankunnu panchayat.

“Another possibility could be from her relatives who had visited Karnataka. Police have found out that her husband and father had gone to Karnataka for work, but they denied it. The panchayat has been declared as a hotspot after the incident,” she said.

The woman from Dharmadom is now under treatment at Kozhikode Medical College after testing positive. Her husband, who is a fish merchant at Thalassery market, also tested positive later. It is not known as to from where they contracted the disease. A nine-member medical team led by Dr Veena of the Pinarayi Public Health Centre has been formed to trace the source. 

The third is the man who hails from Belur in Kasaragod district. He was brought to Pariyaram Medical College after he fell from a jackfruit tree and sustained injuries to the spine two days ago. According to Dr Sudeep, medical superintendent at the hospital, the patient was subjected to Covid-19 test before surgery as stipulated in the protocol.

Dr Sudeep said the person has no known contacts with any Covid-19 patients or has any recent travel history. 

DMO, Kannur, Dr Narayana Nayak said expert panels have been constituted to trace the sources. “Breakthrough has been achieved in the Dharmadom case and the rest will be solved within a few days,” he said.


