Three watering holes of Gujarat stave off Covid-19
2020-04-27
SURAT: Despite sharing borders with worst-hit Covid-19 states of Gujarat and Maharashtra, the Union territories (UTs) of Dadra and Nagar Haveli (DNH), Daman and Diu, have successfully kept the global pandemic at bay.

Daman and Diu, the favourite watering holes for Gujarat, are still Covid free as 2,000 samples that have been collected in three UTs till date have all tested negative. On an average about 400 samples are collected daily and random testing of five samples are done at the Covid-19 laboratory set up at DNH, said Praful Patel, administrator, DNH, Daman and Diu. 

The administration acted at lightning speed to seal its borders with Gujarat districts and Maharashtra immediately after the outbreak, much before the Centre imposed nationwide lockdown on March 25 While the administration ensured that the eight lakh population gets essential items, food packets and ration kits during the lockdown, movement of 4,000 traders from the Daman and DNH to Vapi was strictly restricted. 

Magistrates were appointed in seven zones of the Union territories to list out the requirements. About 25 trucks were hired to get the supplies from Vapi and distributed as per requirement of the shop owners and traders. Daman gets its supplies of vegetables, fruits, poultry, medicines and other things from Vapi. 

Even the people involved in bringing supplies from Vapi were provided free shelter and food in the Union Territory, he said..

Rakesh Minhas, Daman collector said, “As migrant workers have been paid wages till April 3, they can hand to buy essentials and don’t need to return to their natives.”

Minhas said that the calls they get from migrants for ration and food have reduced from 5,000 per day during early days of lockdown to just 200 a day now. “We are distributing about 10,000 ration kits to the migrants and needy people,” he added.

The lone case was reported on April 4 from DNH when a person named Vijay Rathod from Naroli village in Silvassa was referred to a Mumbai hospital where he tested positive. Sandip Kumar Singh, collector, DNH told TOI, “After one positive case, we are doing intensive screening of all residents of DNH. Except for essentials, all other shops are shut.”


