Three persons die while 114 test positive for Covid-19
2020-05-04
Jaipur: Three persons died taking the toll to 71 while 114 others tested positive for Covid-19 in the state on Sunday.

Two persons died in Jaipur. Pratapgarh witnessed first death due to Covid-19. Out of 71 deaths, 40 have happened in Jaipur.

A 35-year-old person, who was brought to district hospital in Pratapgarh died on Saturday. His samples were taken after his death. “The test report was issued on Sunday which came positive. He was brought to the district hospital on April 1 with complaints of breathlessness as he was suffering from severe acute respiratory infection. While undergoing treatment, he died. The doctors suspected him as a Covid-19 case and took his sample,” said a health department official in Pratapgarh.

In Centre’s list of districts, Pratapgarh was classified as green zone. But, on Sunday, Pratapgarh reported two cases and one death.

A 52-year-old man, resident of Madhavdas Colony at Ramgarh Mod, died at SMS hospital on Saturday. An 85-year-old woman, resident of Station Road was rushed to SMS hospital on Saturday, but doctors declared her brought dead. Her test report issued on Sunday showed that she was Covid-19 positive.

The state reported 114 cases on Sunday taking the total cases to 2,886. The districts which reported coronavirus cases are Jodhpur (27), Jaipur (32), Udaipur (5), Chittorgarh (40), Ajmer (3), Bharatpur (2), Kota (2), Pratapgarh (2), while one case was reported from Dungarpur.

In Jaipur, eight cases have been reported from Bhatta Basti of Shastri Nagar area, eight from Anandpuri of Murlipura, seven from Ramganj, two from Chand Pole Bazaar, one each case Kishan pole Bazaar, Jobner, Basbadanpura, Glass Factory on Tonk Road, Adarsh Nagar, Hasanpura and Chaura Rasta.

Army choppers showered flowers on SMS hospital on Sunday to honour doctors and other healthcare staff which have been tirelessly serving the coronavirus patients for two months. Health minister Raghu Sharma, additional chief secretary Rohit Kumar Singh, SMS medical college principal and controller Dr Sudhir Bhandari along with other doctors and healthcare staff were present at the hospital when army choppers showered flowers.


