Three more persons with severe comorbidity succumb to coronavirus, toll touches 30
2020-04-13
PUNE: Three persons, including a Pimpri Chinchwad resident, succumbed to complications associated with novel coronavirus (Covid-19) on Sunday, health officials confirmed.


The two others were residents of Somwar Peth and Tadiwala road in Pune. The officials said all the three persons had other underlying medical conditions, such as hypertension, diabetes and obesity.

The three deaths have pushed the Covid-19 death toll in the Pune Metropolitan Region to 30 so far. Besides, 21 fresh cases of the infection were recorded in the region on Sunday. With this, the total number of positive cases has gone up to 284.

Barring two positive cases registered in Pimpri Chinchwad, the remaining 19 were recorded within the limits of the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC). Officials said most of them were close contacts of the persons who had earlier tested positive for Covid-19. Most of them are residents of Guruwar Peth, Bhavani Peth, Somwar Peth, Tadiwala Road and Kondhwa.

“The three patients succumbing to Covid-19-associated complications had various comorbidity. None of them had any history of recent foreign travel or proximity to known infected persons or their close contacts,” district health officer Bhagwan Pawar said.

A 58-year-old woman, from Lumbininagar on Tadiwala Road was admitted to the civic-body run Naidu hospital with breathlessness on April 9. As she required tertiary care treatment, she was referred to the Sassoon General Hospital the same day.

Her condition kept on worsening, as she had developed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). She succumbed to the associated complication on Sunday. “She was morbidly obese and had been suffering from sleep apnea. She was also a known patient of diabetes and hypertension,” said a doctor from the hospital.

Another victim, a 56-yearold woman from Somwar Peth, was admitted to Sassoon hospital on April 5 after she started experiencing difficulty in breathing. Despite being put on aggressive treatment, her respiratory distress kept on worsening. She succumbed to multi-organ dysfunctions on Sunday.

“She was also a known patient of hypertension and diabetes,” the doctor said.

A 42-year-old security guard, who lived in Pimpri Chinchwad, fell victim to the Covid-19 associated complications at YCM hospital in Pimpri on Sunday. This was the first Covid-19 casualty recorded in Pimpri Chinchwad.

“He was admitted to YCM hospital on April 9. He also had underlying medical conditions,” said Santosh Patil, additional commissioner, Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC).

Pimpri Chinchwad municipal commissioner Shravan Hardikar said, “The man had convulsions following which he was admitted to YCM hospital. He was also a patient of liver cirrhosis. He was on ventilator support for three days.”

