Three more test positive for Covid-19, Kanpur tally now 223
2020-05-03
KANPUR: A police constable and three-year-old daughter of an infected police constable, besides a traffic police constable, were tested positive for coronavirus in Kanpur in the last 24 hours since Friday, taking the total number of Covid -19 patients in the city to 223. Likewise, the total tally of infected policemen has reached 14. 

The three-year-old girl is city’s youngest Covid-19 patient. The infected policeman is posted at Bajaria police station of the city. “He has been tested positive for Covid-19 on Friday and later admitted to Covid 19 hospital of the Lala Lajpat Rai hospital,” said chief medical officer Dr Ashok Shukla. 

The CMO added, “Besides, a traffic police constable and three-year-old daughter of an infected policeman of Raipurwa police station were tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday. They too have been admitted to Covid 19 hospital and their treatment has started.” 

Meanwhile, three corona suspects died at the Covid -19 hospital of Lala Lajpat Rai Hospital on Friday morning, informed chief medical superintendent LLR Hospital Dr RK Maurya. Their test reports are still awaited. Dr Maurya K further told TOI, “A 60-year-old woman, a resident of Govind Nagar, who was admitted to Covid-19 ICU on Thursday as coronavirus suspect, died on Friday morning. Her tests reports are awaited.” 

“A 75-year-old woman from Ranjitpurwa area of Chakeri admitted at Covid -19 ICU on Thursday with symptoms of breathlessness, cough and fever died on Friday morning. Her sample report is awaited,” said Dr Maurya. 

Meanwhile, a 37-year-old man, a resident of Barasirohi, who was also admitted to Covid-19 ward on Thursday, died during treatment on Friday morning,” he added.

Meanwhile, a 30-year-old man, who had tested corona positive and was undergoing treatment at Sarsaul Community Health Centre in the district, and who had tried to end his life by consuming sanitizer on Thursday, died during treatment on Friday at Lala Lajpat Rai hospital. 

He was a native of Jharkhand and was found afflicted with the virus following a test conducted on him by the health department team of Kanpur Dehat. 

“His condition deteriorated and he died on Friday. The last rites of the man took place adopting Covid -19 guidelines,” said Dr Maurya. 


