Three more test positive in Pune, Covid-19 cases go up to 22
2020-03-21
PUNE: Three persons, including a 20-year-old student, a resident of Koregaon Park, and another 24-year-old man from Pimpri Chinchwad, tested positive for the novel coronavirus infection in Pune district on Friday, taking the tally of positive cases to 22.


Divisional commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar confirmed that a 41-year-old woman from Sinhagad Road had also tested positive for Covid-19. 

Her throat swab when sent by the hospital authorities to the National Institute of Virology to rule out swine flu turned out to be positive for Covid-19.

Of the 22 cases in the district, 12 patients are being treated in the isolation ward in Pimpri Chinchwad, and another nine infected patients are being treated at Naidu hospital in Pune. The woman is in Bharati Hospital’s ICU.

The student had returned from Scotland and was isolated at Naidu Hospital after he developed mild illness on March 18. The Pimpri Chinchwad man who tested positive is the brother of a 22-year-old man who recently returned from the Philippines and was earlier found positive for the contagion on March 18. Their contacts are being traced and quarantined.

“The student was aware and hence self-reported to us immediately a few hours after reaching Pune. He did not mingle with many. His parents, grandmother, driver and maid have been quarantined. Their throat swab samples have been sent to the National Institute of Virology and the reports are awaited,” a health official said.

The student landed at Mumbai airport around 1am on March 19. He came down to Pune in his own car which his driver drove. After reaching home, he slept for sometime. “He then self-reported to Naidu hospital at around 12.30pm on March 19 and was isolated immediately. His throat swab samples tested positive for Covid-19 on March 20,” the official said. 

The officials of Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC) said, “Its team of 244 health officials and volunteers have surveyed about 74,998 houses and 2,49, 218 residents in the township till Friday. A total 613 people who returned from a trip abroad are under home quarantine.” 

A state health official said, “Of the Covid-19 infected patients in Maharashtra, 41 are asymptomatic and eight have mild symptoms and two patients admitted at Kasturba Hospital Mumbai are critical.” 

As many as 281 passengers returned from foreign countries are under surveillance in the state. Since January 18, 1,317 people who recently travelled and had flu-like symptoms were hospitalised in isolation wards.Of them, 1,035 people have tested negative and 52 have been found positive for Covid-19 so far.


