Three home quarantine violators booked in Vadodara
2020-03-27
Vadodara: A couple staying in the old city area was booked by the police for fleeing home quarantine on Friday. The police said that they could not find Deepak Patel, 40 and his wife Bhavika, who were asked to stay under home quarantine, in their home in Kalupura area and was later seen in their provision shop near their home.

Upon questioning the cops learnt that the couple had opened the shop in the morning and had dealt with many customers. “The couple’s daughter had returned from Latvia in Europe on March 14 and so the entire family was asked to stay in quarantine. But the couple flouted the orders and hence were booked under Epidemic Diseases Act for spreading infection endangering other people's lives,” said S K Desai, police sub-inspector, city police station.

Another man in Savli too was also booked for fleeing from home quarantine on Friday. Chirag Patel, 28 was booked at Savli police station as he fled from his home during the two-week home quarantine period. The police said that Patel, a resident of Kamalpura village, had returned to India from Nepal and was screened at New Delhi airport. On reaching Vadodara he was asked to remain in home quarantine. 

But on March 24, he went to Nadiad to his brother-in-law’s home. The health department informed police about it following which a case was registered at Savli police station on Thursday.

 “The man has been put under quarantine at government centre in Nadiad now as he violated the instructions,” a police official said.

An offence was registered against Ramiz Salim (26) a resident of Kalol in Panchmahal after he entered into arguments with a health team and did not follow home quarantine instructions. Ramiz, who had returned from Georgia was advised home quarantine.

When a health team visited him on March 22, Ramiz was asked to stay inside his house wearing a mask and answer the health team’s queries. Instead, he came out of his house without a mask and also started to argue when the team asked him his family’s details. The team recorded a video of the entire incident and then registered an offence against Ramiz.


