Coronavirus scare: Three Sinhagad road schools play it safe, will stay shut till Saturday
2020-03-11
Pune: Three schools in and around Sinhagad Road have decided to stay shut till March 14 as a precautionary measure against coronavirus spread. Those staying open have urged students with flu-like symptoms to stay at home.


The management of Vidya Pratishthan Nanded City Public School and Pawar Public School, both in Nanded City, sent out a message to students’ parents on Tuesday evening, saying, “The school would remain closed from March 11-14. Further notification will be sent out on March 14.” The DSK School in Dhayari also issued a notification, stating that it would remain closed till March 14.

Other schools, including pre-primary and day-care centres, confirmed of receiving panic calls from parents. Shubhada Paknikar, owner of a pre-school, said, “We were flooded with calls from parents on Tuesday. We have informed all the parents to send their children to school if they are fit and fine. The students showing flu-like symptoms should be kept at home.”

The Bishop’s School, in a precautionary notice to all the parents, said if any student was found suffering from cough, cold, runny nose and fever, their parents would be called to school to collect the child. The school has also instructed children to wear N-95 masks for the time being and carry a personal alcohol-based sanitiser to school. Besides, the school has also suspended the sale of ice cream or cold drinks on its premises.

The Mansukhbhai Kothari National School also issued a general notification to parents and advised children not to share utensils, water bottles and towels. The Sanskriti School issued an e-mail to parents, advising students to avoid handshakes and instead do “namaste” to greet each other.

Masks not compulsory for students: Education dept

The state education department on Monday clarified that wearing of masks was not compulsory at schools. The clarification followed after the department received letters from parents stating that schools were making their wards wear masks on a mandatory basis. Commissioner of education Vishal Solanki, said, “Schools should not make wearing masks must for students.”


