Three baby girls, aged 90 days and less, beat back Covid-19 in Maharashtra
2020-05-19
PUNE: A 22-day-old girl in Solapur, a 45-day-old girl in Pimpri Chinchwad and a 90-dayold girl in Pune cantonment were among the youngest survivors of Covid-19 in the state.


All three infants were discharged on Sunday from their respective hospitals after they staged a full recovery.

Doctors treating them said breastfeeding had built their immunity and they responded well to treatment. Studies from across the world also show that babies’ immune systems interact with the virus differently from those of adults.

The youngest of the three babies was born on April 26 at Solapur Civil Hospital and sent home with her mother. They live at Rahul Gandhinagar in Solapur city, a hotspot. The mother came in contact with a family member who had tested positive for the coronavirus.

Medical superintendent Audumbar Maske said, “The woman and her baby tested positive and were quarantined in Solapur Civil Hospital on May 5. The baby was just 11 days old then. Both regained health and were discharged on May 17.”

The baby from Pimpri Chinchwad and her four-year old brother tested positive, but their mother did not. They were admitted to Yashwantrao Chavan Memorial Hospital on May 4.

“The baby had a fever and a runny nose for three to four days. On the fourth day, she began to respond to treatment. Breastfeeding improved her immunity. The mother wore a mask and PPE and all three were closely monitored which helped treat them,” said Deepali Ambike, head of the hospital’s paediatrics department.

In the third case, the threemonth-old girl and her father from Modikhana in Pune cantonment area tested positive on May 6, but her mother did not. The baby recovered after 10 days in the Pune Cantonment Board’s Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel General Hospital.

Except for an initial dose of anti-viral drugs, no medicine was given to the baby, the doctors said. Both mother and child were discharged after two successive tests which ruled out the contagion.

V D Gaikwad, resident medical officer of the hospital, told TOI, “We had a paediatrician, a nurse and medical staff to care for the baby and her mother who wore a mask and PPE. She breastfed the baby which improved her immunity and helped her recover.”


