Coronavirus: Three more test positive in Noida
2020-03-28
NOIDA: Three patients tested positive for Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, for the second successive day on Friday, taking the city’s count of individuals with the infection to 17. Three of the patients have recovered and have been discharged.


A 52-year-old male resident of Sector 44 was also found to have the novel coronavirus infection in a test conducted by a private laboratory. However, his samples are being re-tested and the reports will be available on Saturday. The man has been asked to stay in home isolation while the report is awaited.

 
 
All three confirmed cases, a health department official said, were linked to a British man who is suspected to be the source of infection of five others, taking the number of people in his contact chain to test positive for Covid-19 to eight. All eight have tested positive on or after March 24.

The British man had visited the offices of a fire safety firm in Sector 135. Employees of the firm had informed health officials that the man was coughing and had fever during his visit.

The three new patients include a 36-year-old man from Omicron 3 in Greater Noida, who works in that company and the wife (33) and mother (55) of one of his colleagues. The two women live in a housing society in Sector 137.

“All three patients have been admitted to the child PGI hospital in Sector 30. The new cases are related to employees of the same company and we can now trace a total of eight positive cases in the district to this (British) man. We have emailed the health authorities in London already to have him tested. We have been told that he is healthy and has not been tested yet,” said Dr Anurag Bhargava, chief medical officer.

A couple from another Sector 137 society and their daughter had earlier tested positive. 

The area within a 1km radius of the patients’ residences were sealed at 2pm on Friday and will remain under complete lockdown till 10am on Sunday. Sanitisation work has started. Samples of the employee from Omicron 3, whose wife and mother have tested positive, have been sent for re-testing. “We suspect he may be positive and have sent his samples for retesting. There are some cases where a person may be a carrier, but may not be infected. We are not sure if this is such a case. This will be known only after his reports are available,” said Dr Sunil Dohare, the additional CMO.

With nearly half the positive cases in Noida being traced to a single source, officials are tracking all possible contacts. Seven more related people have been tested and their reports are awaited. Around 750 people in this contact chain have been put on surveillance now. These include 19 people who were in direct contact with the patients and 150 employees of the company and their families.


