Three more city advocates, mayor’s son test positive for coronavirus
2020-06-13
Done/ALVI

Times News Network

Kanpur: Three more advocates, including the mayor's son were found positive on Friday. The news created panic among the advocates who demanded closure of all courts for ten days. So far, as many as four advocates, who used to visit courts regularly, have been found positive in the last 72 hours. The health teams are busy in tracing their contact history.

The two associations of advocates--Kanpur Bar Association and the Lawyers Association-- on Friday in a memorandum to the district judge Kanpur Nagar demanded that courts be closed for ten days otherwise they would go on indefinite strike.

The three advocates who have been infected are Ramji Tiwari, joint secretary of the Lawyers Association, Rishabh Awasthi, joint secretary, Kanpur Bar Association and Anurag Pandey, son of mayor Pramila Pandey. Anurag is at present staying at a guest house of Kanpur Municipal Corporation in Moti Jheel. The mayor said the infection might have spread from courts.” People should not be panicked as all precautions would be taken”, she said.

The three advocates who are close friends, used to visit courts regularly even during the lockdown period. The mayor said that his son, after his accident, was staying at a guest house in Moti Jheel and his friends would visit there to meet him. It is possible that one of his friends might have infected him. Moreover, Anurag too had visited the court in a matter. There was no need to get panicked as all would get well soon, she said.

In compliance with the order of Allahabad high court, Kanpur courts reopened on June 8 last after two- and- a-half month long lockdown. The courts were once again closed on June 10 last when an advocate- Kanhaiya Lal Gupta-- was found infected with coronavirus and thereafter the courts were closed for two days.

“The news that three more advocates have been found positive has sent an alarm bell that the courts are not safe and are emerging as a new hotspot”, said Kapil Deep Sachan, general secretary, Kanpur Bar Association. Talking to TOI, he said. “Earlier, the Kanpur courts were brought into the containment zone after a police constable was found infected in the Reserve Police Line.

“Since UHM and Dufferin hospitals which are new hotspots are within the 500 metre radius of Kanpur courts, therefore, there are more chances of the spread of infection”, Sachan said. The news has created fear among advocates as well as court employees and they have demanded that the entire court campus and chambers of advocates be sanitized and closed for at least 10 days, he said.

The two associations of advocates, after an emergency meeting, gave a memorandum to the district judge Kanpur Nagar and urged him to close the courts for ten days .The two associations clearly stated in the memorandum that advocates would observe indefinite strike if courts were not closed. Almost all office- bearers of the two associations were present in the meeting.


