Coronavirus scare: Three co-flyers of Kochi woman in Kolkata hospital
2020-02-04
KOLKATA: Three novel coronavirus suspects have been put under observation in the isolation ward of Infectious Diseases & Beliaghata General Hospital (ID&BG). All three had flown into Kolkata from Kunming on January 23 on the same flight that carried the medical student from Kerala who tested positive for the virus.


“Currently, we have admitted three persons in our isolation ward and they are under observation. Their swab samples were taken on Monday and sent to NICED Kolkata for confirmatory tests,” said ID&BG medical superintendent and vice-principal Ashish Manna. While one of the passengers is from Kolkata, the other two are from Jhargram and North 24 Parganas.

Sources in the health department said none of the three showed any prominent symptom of the virus but since they travelled on the same plane as the medical student, who tested positive for the virus—she is the first coronavirus patient in the country—they had been admitted to the state’s referral hospital for infectious diseases as a precautionary measure.

Health department officials, who have started tracking down passengers from Bengal who had travelled by the same flight from Kunming, have so far zeroed in on four flyers. While three have been admitted to ID Hospital, the fourth person is in home isolation. 

“The health department is constantly in touch with the fourth person who is in home isolation. We expect to get results of the three samples from NICED by Tuesday,” said Ajay Chakraborty, director, health services.

Two other male patients, both from Kolkata, also turned up at ID&BG Hospital on their own on Tuesday. One of them, who landed here from South Korea via Beijing on January 10, said he had cold and cough and so, wanted to get the test done. But when the hospital authorities said he had to be admitted to the isolation ward if his samples were to be taken, he returned home. The second person had returned from China on January 29. Sources said the man was asymptomatic but he initially had gone to a private hospital off EM Bypass out of anxiety. From there, he was referred to ID Hospital. Doctors examined him at the emergency and sent him home with the advice of home isolation. 

All medical and non-medical staff members at the hospital’s emergency wing and isolation ward have been directed to wear masks while on duty. 

“The masks are meant as a precautionary measure. These should be no reason for panic. At the same time, we have to take all preventive steps to stay on the safe side,” said Anima Halder, principal at ID&BG Hospital.


