Three more Covid-19 +ve cases in Kolhapur
2020-05-10
KOLHAPUR: Three new Covid-19 cases were reported in the district on Saturday. The total number of Covid-19 cases have reached 18. While 10 patients have recovered, seven are undergoing treatment and one has succumbed.

According to the district health administration, among the three people who tested positive are a constable with the Mumbai police, her younger son and another youth. The constable and her son had come to their native place in Ajara tehsil to cremate her elder son who died of prolonged illness in Mumbai. 

Both were advised to stay in institutional quarantine. After the constable reported uneasiness, the throat swab samples of her and her son were sent for testing. According to local administration, 20 people who came into contact with both of them have been taken to institutional quarantine.

 Another youth from Chandgad tehsil also tested positive. The three of them are undergoing treatment at Chhatrapati Pramila Raje Rugnalaya, the civil hospital in Kolhapur.

A senior health official said that all three have a travel history. 

“The constable’s family live in BDD Chawl area which is a Covid-19 hotspot. We have asked the local authorities to trace the contacts. We have also communicated with the Mumbai city administration about the cases we reported here,” said the official.

The places from where these cases have emerged have bee declared as containment zone, the official added.

Meanwhile, the corporators during the video conference with the civic chief Mallinath Kalshetti said people arriving from other cities and towns should be kept in institutional quarantine centres. 

The corporators said that the instances of knowing people and allowing them to go back to their homes without proper checking may happen so to avoid such scenarios, independent observers should be appointed. 

Senior corporator Jayant Patil said, “Till today around 17,000 people have applied to come into the district. Many of them are likely to be from the city and could be from the hotspots of Covid cases. They should be under home quarantine for 14 days.”

He said that the authority to decide whether a person will be in home quarantine or institutional quarantining should be given to independent experts instead of local ward-level committees.

Corporator Murlidhar Jadhav said that people arriving in the district should be directly taken to Covid care centres and their throat swab samples should be taken for testing. Till the results are awaited, the persons should be put in institutional quarantine.


