Tiger cub rescued, sans protection measures for Covid-19
2020-04-25
Nagpur: Even as Covid-19 has been detected in tigers and lions at the Bronx Zoo, and pet cats at New York, in the USA, a three-month-old tiger cub was rescued from a stack of paddy husk at Sushi-Dabgaon village on Friday, without any anti-Covid measures.

Chichpalli range forest officials said the cub was first seen at 6.35am by villager Rupesh Kothare near the house of one Ajay Shende. After seeing villagers the scared cub entered the heap of dry grass.

Villagers informed forest staff and also called wildlife lover Umesh Zire from Mul, who always coordinates with the department during rescue operations. As a mob gathered, Zire sought permission from senior officials to lift the cub to a safer place and was allowed to shift the animal.

Videos and pictures show that no precaution was taken by forest staff while handling the cub. The handler did not wear a mask and lifted the cub with bare hands. Experts say, “Though intention of the handler may be to save the cub from the mob, in the wake of Covid-19 being detected in wild animals, this is not the professional way to rescue a tiger cub.”

Zire said, “As the mob had started gathering from nearby areas, it was necessary to shift the cub, which was already showing sluggish movement, to a safer place. We shifted it to a nearby nursery at Kelzar and barred entry of people.”

The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) and Central Zoo Authority (CZA) have already issued an advisory to take utmost care while handling tigers during rescue and treatment.

The finding of the cub near a busy village beside Mul-Chandrapur road is surprising. Generally, in territorial areas, mother tigress doesn’t desert such small cubs, and they are rarely left unattended.

However, Chandrapur CCF SV Ramarao said, “The tigress is still there and was sighted by the staff and volunteers in the morning during a search of the nearby area. I’m not aware whether the cub was handled poorly. ”

“The cub has been shifted in the evening to the area where it was found so it can reunite with the mother. Post primary treatment, veterinarians had declared the cub fit for release. A tigress in Kawdapeth forest area has three cubs. We suspect the cub might be one of them,” said Ramarao. 

On April 11, a mahua flower collector from Kawdapeth, Gulab Nikure (45), was killed by a tiger. The distance between Kawdapeth and Sushi is 3.5km as the crow flies.

Forest officials said during a search for the tigress in the area at 10.30am they sighted a tigress near a water body, around 3.5km away from the spot where the cub was found. It escaped on seeing the people.


