Tigers roam in the wild unseen, undeterred as lockdown keeps visitors out of reserves
2020-03-31
Mysuru: The lockdown may have caused lot of hardships to ordinary people, but it has also brought some good fortune for wildlife, especially the tigers in the reserve forests. The big cats, which were under tremendous pressure due to regular movement of safari vehicles and disturbances caused by tourists, are now freely prowling in their respective territories.

The state has five tiger reserves – Nagarahole National Park, Bandipur Tiger Reserve, Male (Malai) Mahadeshwara Wildlife Sanctuary, Biligiri Ranganathaswamy Temple Tiger Reserve (both in Chamarajanagar district), Badra Tiger Reserve (Chikkamagaluru district) and Kali Tiger Reserve (at Dandeli in Shivamogga district).

The reserves together house 524 tigers and 6,049 elephants as per the latest census.

“Heavy movement of safari vehicles and tourists, especially during weekends in Bandipur and Nagarahole, has caused lot of stress on the tigers. Such stress reduces the life span of wild animals in the reserves,” said Krithika Alanahally, wildlife warden of Mysuru.

“The ban on vehicles has also reduced air and noise pollution and brought incidents of road kills to zero. The forest officers and staff can now concentrate more on monitoring the forest to prevent any fire incidents and poaching activities,” she said.

While safari has been banned in the reserves, the government has also restricted regular vehicle movements inside the forests, allowing only goods vehicles carrying essential items and other emergency vehicles to pass through the check-posts.

Bandipur conservator of forests and field director, project tiger, T Balachandra told TOI that wild animals are very happy after the ban on vehicles.

“We see animals, especially elephants, deers, sambars, leopards and others on the roads resting and roaming freely without any disturbance. There is a ban on public carriers and only vehicles carrying essential goods like milk, vegetables and ambulances are allowed to cross the check-posts. Meanwhile, we are vigilant to prevent fire and poaching activities. All the forest ranges have received light rainfall and another one or two showers will ensure that there will be no fire incident this summer,” he said.

Male (Malai) Mahadeshwara Wildlife Sanctuary, which houses nearly 20 tigers, is all set to be declared as Male (Malai) Mahadeshwara Hills Tiger Reserve. 

Speaking to TOI, DCF V Yedukondalu said that all check-posts are closed and only emergency vehicles are allowed.

“Animals are happy and sleep on the road. We have received good rainfall and there is greenery everywhere. Since there is no traffic, there are no accidents as well,” he said.


