Tigers under watch for coronavirus infection
2020-04-11
KOZHIKODE: The state forest department has installed more camera traps in wildlife sanctuaries and national parks as part of its intensified monitoring of tigers for symptoms of Covid-19. 

The move comes in the wake of a four-year-old Malayan tiger, Nadia, of Bronx Zoo in New York, testing positive for the disease.

Field officials of the Wayanad Wildlife Sanctuary (WWS), home to the largest number of tigers in the state, have been asked to install camera traps near waterbodies. 

The sanctuary is home to more than 80 of the state’s 190 tigers.

Principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) and chief wildlife warden Surendra Kumar said such cameras would help monitor tigers any possible symptoms.

Additionally, people were being prevented from entering the core forest areas.

Forest officials said camera-trap surveillance of waterholes would help assess the health status of the big cats

“It is difficult to spot a tiger during field observation. We are setting up camera traps for monitoring the animals near waterholes as there are chances for the animal to frequent them if it is weak or running a temperature," B N Anjan Kumar, chief conservator of forest (wildlife- northern circle), said.

He added that if a tiger was found frequenting the waterhole more than the normal frequency of once in two-three days, besides loitering there, then it would be monitored closely.

“In WWS and Aralam Wildlife Sanctuary, we have deployed camera traps at few prominent locations and in Parambikulam Tiger Reserve, it will be done in a couple of days,” he added.

The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) had issued an advisory asking chief wildlife wardens of all states with tiger population to observe for symptoms of coronavirus in the animals to avert the possibility of the big cats catching the virus.

The NTCA advisory said tigers must be monitored directly and through camera traps for visible Covid-19-like symptoms, such as nasal discharge, coughing and laboured breathing.

Incidentally, the death of 10-year-old tiger, code-named T-21, in Madhya Pradesh's Pench Tiger Reserve on April 4, sparked suspicion that the animal might have caught the virus. According to the tiger census, 2018, India has 2,967 tigers in the wild.

The Central Zoo Authority, meanwhile, had asked the zoological parks in the country to be on high alert and monitor animals 24x7 using CCTV for any abnormal behavior/symptoms. 

The advisory also said that keepers and handlers should not be allowed near the animals without safety gear.


