Till now, Covid fight on right path
2020-04-02
Thiruvananthapuram: Though Kerala was the first state where Covid-19 was detected in the last week of January, the first three patients from Wuhan were safely isolated and cured by mid-February as Kerala had planned everything to fight the spread of the disease.

Its real fight against the contagious virus began on March 8 when three positive cases arose in Pathanamthitta. The trio arrived from Italy, the then hotbed of Covid-19, mingled freely with friends and neighbours while travelling extensively in central Kerala. Three weeks later, the state isolated almost 1.63L persons and recorded 252 new positive cases till Wednesday.

But, a quick analysis of the pattern of spread in the past three weeks has brought some amount of confidence to health department with experts saying that the number of positive cases may reach 500 in the next two weeks after which the curve will begin to flatten. There is some relief that the lockdown has curbed the import of new cases.

On Tuesday, Pothencode panchayat in Thiruvananthapuram and five bordering wards were put under quarantine for three weeks as officials couldn’t find the contact of Abdul Azeez (68) who succumbed to coronavirus. Though authorities didn’t mention anything about community spread, the precautions at Pothencode resemble the standard protocol followed during a community spread. This week, six villages of Kasaragod were totally locked down by the police in a similar manner.

State planning board member Dr B Ekbal, who is also a member of the expert group formed by government on Covid-19, said that Kerala has contained the spread of virus to community from the positive cases. “Our biggest advantage is that we went for a total shut down at the right moment. This might be the reason why India reported less cases compared to other countries. There might be an argument that we didn’t do tests on asymptomatic people. Now is the time for a social surveillance and maximum possible tests,” he said.

IMA secretary general Dr R V Asokan said infections here are limited to clusters and it offers excellent prospects for containment. “No one can predict when we can put an end to the spread of this virus in a community. Communities differ in countries, states and districts. At present, we are on the right path and have done well. Now an epidemiological study in the community is imminent. Only after such a detailed study, we can take a decision on continuing restrictions or relaxing lockdown,” he said.

Experts believe that the 21-day lockdown has arrested the spread of the virus. They also fear that if the lockdown is relaxed and people are allowed on the streets, things might change.

“As per international standards, there should be restriction for 45 days. Then we can claim to be safe because the incubation period of people with the virus would be completed. We had the last flight from abroad on March 22 and hence till April first week, we still have the possibility of reporting more cases,” said state secretary of Kerala Government Medical Officers Association Dr GS Vijayakrishnan.

“We have prepared a report on the need for social surveillance that must begin now. This report would be presented before state Covid cell in a day or two. We need a grassroots-level support to make this effective. A random testing of people will ensure how safe we are,” said Ekbal. 

Vijayakrishnan said social surveillance in state should go on till April end so that we can ensure that carriers and their primary contacts are traced and cured. For health department, which foresaw Pathanamthitta as a boiling point, the sudden surge of cases in Kasaragod was a surprise. 


