Time to reopen Delhi, have to live with coronavirus: Kejriwal
2020-05-04
NEW DELHI: With Delhi’s economy in doldrums, revenue collection hitting rock bottom and almost no money to pay salaries to government staffers, CM Arvind Kejriwal on Sunday said it was time to relax lockdown in the city. He requested the Centre to let the containment zones remain completely sealed and make the rest of the city — now fully a ‘red zone’ — a ‘green zone’ and allow markets to open from Monday.


Addressing a digital press conference, the CM said people had lost their jobs and shops and industries were closed since the lockdown was imposed, thereby affecting the state’s economy. This, he added, couldn’t be endured for long. “When all economic activities are shut and revenue generation has stopped, how do we give salaries? How do we run the government?” Kejriwal said.

Reasoning that the coronavirus was here to stay, he said, “We will have to adapt and prepare to live with corona. And Delhi is ready for it.”

“You (the Centre) can make the opening of shops on odd-even basis. We hope if Delhi markets open, the economy will also open. Some cases of coronavirus will increase, but we are prepared to tackle them,” the CM said, adding that Delhi had enough number of PPE kits and proper arrangements at hospitals if there was a rise in the number of cases.


No public transport, but you can take out your car

From Monday, the Delhi government has allowed movement of people for all non-essential works between 7am and 7pm, besides opening of all private offices with 33% staff and let self-employed people such as domestic helps, sanitation workers, technicians, mechanics, plumbers and electricians to operate.

Though the guidelines issued by the Centre says the resident welfare associations will decide if the maids are allowed in a residential colony, there was no such restriction imposed by the Delhi government, a senior official said. “If there are instances that the RWAs are not allowing despite residents wanting the maids to work, the government may intervene. Such disputes will be sorted at the ground level,” another government functionary said.

While public transport, including Metro and buses, taxis, auto-rickshaws and cycle-rickshaws won’t ply, people can move around alone on two-wheelers and with two passengers in a car.

All standalone shops and the ones located in the neighbourhood and residential complexes dealing in essential or non-essential commodities, including liquor — off-shops will remain open from 9am to 6.30pm — pan, gutkha and cigarettes, would also be allowed to function, the chief minister said.

All factories in industrial areas with access control have also been permitted along with most commercial and private establishments including IT and IT-enabled services, data and call centres, warehouses, cold storage, private security and facility management services. Industrial units manufacturing IT hardware, packaging material apart from essential commodities will continue to function.

The Delhi government has also allowed sub-registrar offices to function where people can go with prior appointments, apart from all government offices engaged in essential services with 100% staff and others with limited number of junior cadre officials and personnel.

State officials said these relaxations were in accordance to the national guidelines issued by the Union home ministry on Friday.

With virtually no source of revenue generation, the Delhi government barely managed to collect about Rs 350crore in the month of April, which was just 10% of Rs 3500 crore collected in the first month of last fiscal. 

Reading out the list of relaxations the Centre has permitted in red zones (all 11 districts of Delhi have corona hotspots, hence in red zones), the chief minister accepted that there would be some increase in the number of Covic-19 positive cases and Delhi was prepared to deal with them.

Kejriwal said that Delhi government had used the one-and-a-half month of lockdown period to strengthen its capacity to deal with the corona cases and the city was now all prepared if the lockdown was opened.

He added that it was important to implement a complete lockdown in March to prevent the coronavirus from spreading as the country was not ready with health facilities, PPE kits and the understanding of social distancing.

