Time to look beyond lockdown, resume business: Industry to Tamil Nadu government
2020-04-24
CHENNAI: Industry, while appreciating the lockdown, now wants the state government to offer fiscal and procedural support to get it back on its feet. 

"The government has prevented a holocaust. Now the discourse should move to the next level. We cannot extend lockdowns. We must not delay things any further," said Palani G Periasamy, chairman Dharani Sugars and president of South India Sugar Mills Association. "Only commerce can bring back lost livelihood."

"There is not even a single positive case among more than 35,000 mill employees. We have done well to contain. We must now restart. We cannot afford to postpone things any further. For our industry, the problem is labour and truck availability to start working. Some mills have started, others are getting ready," he said.

Senior officials from the state government headed by the CM had a video conference with industry representatives and sought their feedback. 

N Srinivasan, vice chairman & MD of The India Cements, is learnt to have told the CM that each industry has its own problems in resuming operations. For cement makers, transporting cement is the main problem as trucks are struck midway and drivers have abandoned them. Cement industry has no problem in producing and selling cement. It can resume operation once the permission is obtained, he is learnt to have said.

CII state council head Hari K Thiagarajan said he asked the CM to allow at least 50% of export capacity. "The state has an edge in exports. With China and Vietnam coming back, we should allow our units to complete pending orders immediately. Besides, with villages largely insulated from Covid, units in smaller towns should be allowed to reopen," he said. Another important suggestion is a separate package for MSMEs, he added.

MM Forgings has said it will reopen its factory in Singampunari in a day. "We have received approvals for reopening the factory and also the one in Pant Nagar in north India," said Vidyashankar Krishnan, MD of the company. 

Ditto with Apollo Tyres. "We have taken approvals but are just getting plants ready to start production if needed. Our initial focus is on despatches of tyre inventory in the factory," said Satish Sharma, president, Apollo Tyres. Its competitor Michelin has opened its factory in Thervoy Kandigai with fewer staff and will scale it up gradually. 


