Time to unlock some lockdown art
2020-04-08
Kochi: Kochi Biennale has reached out to artist community to share art works created by them during the lockdown. 

“We want to know what they’ve created during this lock-down and wish to use our platform to show how artists continue to work during such situations,” said Bose Krishnamachari in a message sent to the artists. 

The art works would be published on social mdia platforms including Instagram and Facebook pages of the foundation and its website, he said. 

“Many may not have access to art material. I myself used colour pencils of my children to create drawings,” said Krishnamachari who is at Mumbai. 

The first work in the series shared by Kochi Biennale is that of artist Jitish Kallat, who curated the 2014 edition of Kochi-Muziris Biennale. Kallat had also participated in the 2018 Kochi-Muziris Biennale as an artist. 

“The inaugural 10 weeks of the new decade have thrown several unexpected curve-balls at us, human species. Since I returned to Mumbai from the US on March 14, I hadn’t visited my home until the end of the month,” wrote Kallat in a note attached to the work shared on Kochi Biennale Instagram handle. 

For a fortnight, Kallat said, he was in self-imposed isolation at the studio. “I did one water colour in which fragments of discarded sculptures sit atop the drawing and lines freely run over various elements. I may never end up exhibiting this work, but it allowed me a degree of creative nonconformity, a small step towards realizing a body of photo-works that have been lying dormant,” he wrote. 

The foundation is not looking at finished works but things like sketches, proposals, photos, idea-maps, etc,. “We would like to show our online audience how artists continue to work even during such situations, what sort of art is created during a pandemic and what purpose art serves during times like these,” Krishnamachari said. 

Artists have been asked to send a high resolution image of the work and a brief text along with it.


