Tirupur patient’s wife tests negative for Covid-19
2020-03-25
COIMBATORE: Less than 12 hours after a 48-year-old businessman from Tirupur tested positive for Covid-19, public health authorities on Tuesday confirmed that his wife, who was transported to ESIC Hospital in Coimbatore, has tested negative for the virus. 


His daughter and driver have also been isolated and throats swabs were taken for the tests, though both remain asymptomatic. While his daughter has been home quarantined, the driver is quarantined at the Tirupur GH. 

The patient, who the health minister tweeted had tested positive, had travelled to London and flown down to Chennai on March 15. “We understand that he drove down from Chennai to Tirupur in his own vehicle the same night or early next day,” said Tirupur collector K Vijaykarthikeyan. 

“The patient suspected he had the virus and immediately quarantined himself. On 17th, he contacted the helpline number and the Tirupur GH team went to his house and collected his throat swab,” he said. “Though the results still weren’t out, on 20th, he got himself admitted in ESIC Hospital,” he added. 

The public health department in Tirupur have so far placed 197 people under home quarantine, including the patient’s daughter, and have allotted a team to track them. “Police and revenue officials have been stationed in front of every quarantined person’s home, to ensure no one goes in or out of the house,” said Vijaykarthikeyan. “Another team has been allocated to trace contacts of Covid-19 positive patients and even those with who are showing symptoms,” he said.

Police home guards have also been sent to the 314-odd quarantined households in the district to keep them inside their homes. “We have already begun sticking the dark green quarantine stickers in front of the houses and stamping people’s hands too, so they can’t be missed,” said deputy director of public health, Dr G Ramesh Kumar. 

Contact tracing of the Spain return patient who tested positive for Covid-19, continues. Officials identified people who travelled with her in the A1 coach of the Yeshwanthpur Express on March 14 and passed on contacts to Kerala.

Another four people with travel histories have come to ESIC Hospital with symptoms of the virus. “Throat swabs of the new patients have been collected and they have been quarantined for now. We have another eight people already in quarantine despite them being tested negative,” said dean, Dr Nirmala.


