TJ cluster adds 13 more to Covid +ve cases
2020-04-07
Trichy: Two days after recording 17 Covid-19 positive cases for the first time, Trichy on Monday took its count to 30, which include 13 new Tablighi Jamaat (TJ) delegates. The number of Covid positive patients in the central region of the state also went up to 88 with Thanjavur and Ariyalur reporting three and one cases each on Monday.

Among the samples of 28 patients including TJ delegates tested at Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Government Hospital (MGMGH), 13 tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday. A media bulletin from the state health and family welfare confirmed that those who tested positive on Monday in Trichy had attended the Tablighi Jamaat conference in Delhi. As many as 30 Covid-19 positive patients, all TJ congregation attendees, are undergoing treatment at MGMGH. According to the Trichy district administration, the hospital has to release the result of nine more patients on Monday.

The administration said that a total of 69 TJ delegates tested negative for Covid-19 on Saturday and Sunday and 15 on Monday.

As many as 12 patients who tested negative were discharged with an advice of home quarantine on Monday. The hospital administration and district collector S Sivarasu shifted 69 TJ delegates to Jamal Mohammed College (JMC) in Trichy on Sunday night as they asked the authorities to discharge them or provide them better accommodation. Policemen are employed at JMC to prevent them from stepping out of the quarantine facility. A couple of doctors and nurses have been posted at the college to monitor their health condition. The district administration was very firm that they will be discharged only after 28 days of quarantine provided they tested negative in the blood tests. A 70-year-old man lodged in the college vomited and had giddiness following which he was shifted to MGMGH on Monday morning. A total of 867 medical teams from the public health and preventive medicine and corporation have tested 2,46,886 people in 58,494 residences in 110 areas in Trichy district. 

Thanjavur also reported three more cases taking the tally to eight. A 40-year old man from Athirampattinam and a 46-year-old man from Neivasal in Orathanadu taluk are TJ delegate. The third case was a journalist of a web television channel in Delhi. He had returned from Delhi by flight. They were being treated at Thanjavur Medical College Hospital.

The positive case in Ariyalur was a 47-year-old man, also a TJ delegate, from Sendurai. He was shifted to MGMGH. Five of his family members have been home quarantined after taking their blood samples at the government hospital in Ariyalur. The district administration has marked containment zone around the Sendurai town to prevent public movement. Four other men from Ariyalur district with a travel history to New Delhi tested negative for Covid-19 on Monday. 

( With inputs from D Vincent Arockiaraj, S Deepak Karthik)


