TJ members, foreign returnees caused MP Covid-19 spike: CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan
2020-04-19
CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan attributes the rising number of Covid-19 cases in the state to Tablighi Jamaat (TJ) members who returned from Delhi and also those who came back from foreign visits, and hid their travel history. In an interview to TOI’s Mohua Chatterjee, he says a 10-member committee is looking into all aspects of the state's fight against coronavirus. Excerpts:

Do you feel taking over as CM in the time of corona was a challenge as the regime change left you with no system in place to deal with the pandemic?

From the moment I was sworn in, my focus has been preventing the spread of Covid-19. Initially there were few cases and after that a rapid increase in the number of cases around major cities like Indore and Bhopal. TJ members who returned from Delhi are also a reason for this sudden rise and also people who came back to the state from foreign visits and hid themselves. But now, we are trying to strengthen our medical infrastructure. More than 400 containment areas have been marked in the 26 districts. Contact tracing is being done in all such areas. Screening and quarantining of more than 55,000 people who came from abroad have been undertaken.


How are you running a big state without a Cabinet to oversee departments like health, agriculture, labour?

Yes, it is right that the Cabinet plays a crucial role. Working in a team helps during challenging times. Safety of public representatives is also important and every representative is a part of this fight. I am continuously coordinating with MLAs and MPs and with their consultation and suggestions I am taking many decisions for the state. We have just formed a committee of 10 members to look after different aspects of this fight against Covid-19.


How did Indore turn into a corona hub?
Indore is our prime commercial centre, a densely populated city. It is a place where a large number of people travel abroad for business purposes. Initially such people hid their travel histories, came in contact with others and spread the infection. I am regularly reviewing the situation through video conferencing.

We are implementing an “identify, isolate, test and treat” (IITT) strategy. The testing rate in Indore is much higher than the rest of the state. 5,120 samples have been taken in Indore, out of which 1,000 samples have been sent to Delhi for testing. 489 teams are engaged in this work. So far, 3.9 lakh persons have been surveyed in the affected areas. A total of 12 to 13 lakh persons have been surveyed in the entire city. In the next seven days, 20 to 21 lakh persons will be surveyed.

There are also clear instructions for fair price ration to be sent out to all districts in sufficient quantity and there should be no delay in distribution. If necessary the ration can be distributed from house-to-house. In order to ensure that vegetables and fruits of farmers are not spoiled, outside the city decentralized purchase of their fruits and vegetables can be arranged while adhering to social distancing norms.

Following Centre’s instructions, a containment plan is ready. In Plan A, the infected and suspects are monitored. In Plan B tests, blood samples, etc. are taken. Under rapid action, three types of teams are working. One team focuses on public awareness and consultation. Another goes home to take samples, and a third provides support to people on a psychological level.


For a third time, quarantined patients have fled from hospital in Indore.

We are continuously trying to counsel such people, telling them not to be scared or misinformed. Anyone who goes against the law should be brought to book. A system has been created to monitor home quarantine where if any person who is in quarantine leaves his house, an alert will reach the control room. The boundaries and affected areas of Indore district have been completely sealed and a three-tier blockade has been put in place. Persons who fled will be found soon.


With almost all top state health department officials testing positive or quarantined, how are you dealing with the situation?
These personnel were the first ones on the frontiers of this battle and so unfortunately they came in contact with the virus. For such officials due care is being taken to safeguard their lives. They are being quarantined for now. It is also a fact that this war cannot cease and keeping this in mind, a second line of officials has been prepared for the task.


