Tablighi Jamaat meet alters Covid-19 combat strategies of Telugu states
2020-04-01
HYDERABAD: The Tablighi Jamaat (TJ) meet at Nizamuddin in Delhi has changed Covid-19 scenario in the two Telugu states, resulting in a spike in deaths and positive cases. 


 Of 1,030 attendees from Telangana, six have died. At least 22 attendees and 19 of their family members have tested positive. 

In AP, 19 attendees and two of their family members tested positive. An attendee died, but officials said the sample from the body came negative for Covid-19. A couple related to some attendees also died, however, their test results were awaited. 

Telangana health minister Eatala Rajendra told TOI, “ Most delegates returned home by March 20. The 14-day window period for symptoms to show up would get over for 80% of them is tomorrow. Of them, 22 are severely affected, and 19 of their family members tested positive. Four deaths — two at Gandhi Hospital and one each at two private hospitals — were reported . Regarding deaths at Nizamabad and Gadwal, we didn’t collect the samples as they went to Delhi and had similar symptoms. They suspect they too died due to Covid-19.” 

Andhra Pradesh principal secretary health K S Jawahar Reddy told TOI the two deaths were looked into. “In the first death, the test result was negative for Covid19 and in the second case samples have been sent for confirmatory tests. 

Öf 17 positive cases reported in AP on Tuesday, 14 were linked to the Nizamuddin meet. AP director-general of police Gautam Sawang told TOI, “We have obtained the list of organisers. Kurnool has the highest attendees with 252 followed by Nellore 72 and Guntur and Kadapa .”

“Of 20,846 foreign returnees, 18,633 are covered by an app. If they move 50 metres out, they will be caught. Around 384 are still missing. There were positive cases among those who returned from Mecca and the UK and their primary contacts. Now, with those from the meet, the numbers increased,” Sawang added. An Intelligence Bureau official said, “The couple who died was diabetic. They had respiratory issues too. It took three days to get them admitted to hospital.” 


