Tamil Nadu TJ members quarantined in Delhi seek better care
2020-04-24
The death of a 60-year-old Tablighi Jamaat (TJ) member from Coimbatore, who was kept in a quarantine centre in Sultanpuri in New Delhi, on Wednesday has sparked demands from fellow TJ men for better care. Around 500 TJ members from Tamil Nadu are kept in nine quarantine centres in Delhi.

Pointing out that the man, who tested negative for Covid-19, was a diabetic, they alleged that he was not given adequate medical attention.

A video of Jamaat members arguing with the authorities there in an agitated state after the death of elderly man has also surfaced. 

With no means to bring his body back, his family has given an authorisation letter to Delhi authorities for burial there. “He was buried on Thursday evening,” a family member said.

The Tablighi Jamaat members, who have been quarantined in New Delhi for the past 30 days, have also sought the AIADMK government to impress upon the authorities in the national capital to provide them better care.

Ahead of Ramzan, they also urged the state government to ensure additional arrangements. 

TJ headquarters spokesman Thamin Ansari, who hails from Tamil Nadu, said among the nine places converted into quarantine centres, Sultanpuri seemed to lack proper facilities. “Food is being served very late. For instance, breakfast is given only around 11.30am there,” he said. He is also quarantined in Delhi. 

Ansari said besides the psychological shock of being isolated and kept away from families for a long time, the Delhi weather, the North Indian food and anxiety were taking a toll on them. He said five TJ members from Tamil Nadu have died in Delhi so far in various quarantine centres. Of them, three were Covid-19 negative, he said.

With Ramzan month to commence in a day or two, TJ members sought the TN government to impress upon Delhi authorities to ensure early breakfast by 4am and other facilities.

N Thalavai Sundaram, Tamil Nadu’s special representative to New Delhi, said he would look into the issue. “Our officials did take steps to provide food and fruits to quarantined TJ members. But they were told not to do so as a precautionary measure. I will ensure that their requirements are met,” he said.


