Tablighi Jamaat member recalls tests, treatment & biryani from friends
2020-05-10
MANGALURU: From police interrogation to calls for plasma donation, it has a been a roller coaster ride for Mohammed Saleem Hegde ever since it became known that he had attended the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in New Delhi in March. The 52-year-old auto driver was asymptomatic but tested positive on returning and spent a fortnight in hospital while his family went into quarantine. 

Staying positive, reading and, Saleem stresses, eating well helped him through the isolation. Now, post quarantine and isolation, things are finally settling down. “I have been a Muslim for the past 23 years and visit the Tablighi Jamaat regularly. I was at the Nizamuddin Markaz on March 15 and even met the Markaz head, Maulana Saad. I left Delhi by train on March 18,” he says. “Those who criticised me and Tablighi Jamaat a few days ago are now calling to check if I am willing to donate plasma. Life has returned to normal.” He’s willing of course, he says, provided he doesn’t have to leave Mangaluru and go through quarantine again. 

Saleem returned on March 20 and drove home in his own auto-rickshaw from the railway station. After offering namaaz at Chembugudde Masjid, he stayed home. “I had returned home after nearly 40 days so I was spending time with my family. Then came the janata curfew and lockdown. On March 31, when there was some relaxation, I stepped out to buy provisions.”

By then, the Nizamuddin Markaz had made it to national and global headlines as a potential super spreader for the entire country. “The situation changed from April 1. I got a call from Mangaluru North police station. I thought it was a fake call since they were speaking very politely,” he laughs. “They said they had information that I had attended the Nizamuddin Markaz and asked for details. I told them I had travelled with two friends on February 8. Soon, an ambulance arrived and I was taken to the quarantine centre.”

At the centre, there were at least four women who had been to Ajmer Dargah. “They were in qurantine because they had boarded the train from Hazrat Nizamuddin railway station,” says Saleem.

“The next day, my swab test was conducted. The Ullal police arrived and interrogated me for nearly 90 minutes. A group photo was taken. They even took my single photo. On April 4, they shifted me to Government Wenlock Hospital — the designated Covid-19 hospital — saying I have to undergo more tests. Nobody told me what was happening. Around 4pm, my son called and told me that I had tested positive and our building had been sealed. My wife and son were taken to the quarantine centre at ESI Hospital. I remained calm. I told the doctors I wanted to see the report. It was given to me the next day,” he recalls. 

On April 5, at 8pm, the police called again, asked for his mobile handset as they wanted to go through his contacts. “I told them that I am willing to give my handset only if I am given an alternative phone, so that I could stay in touch with my wife and son. They gave me a basic handset and as promised, returned my phone within three days. My treatment had begun and everyone stayed at least five metres away from me. I kept looking out of the window, just like jailbirds do in films,” he says.

Saleem made sure there was a routine to his days in isolation, though. “Blood samples were regularly taken. I offered namaz everyday and prayed for the doctors and nurses too. I had taken books to keep me engaged. Officials from the deputy commissioner’s office and doctors kept calling to check how I was doing. My friends used to drop in with biryani and fruits for me at the reception and I waved at them from the window. On April 15, a test was conducted again and two days later, I was dropped back home in the ambulance,” he says. 

Having fought the disease and stigma, Saleem has some words of advice for Covid patients. “It is important to stay positive and not get affected by negative messages one hears and sees in the media. Everyone from my family, building, people from the mosque and those who travelled with me all tested negative. I was also asymptomatic,” he says.

Most importantly, he reminds patients, they must eat well to fight the infectin. “I have seen patients who stopped eating on hearing that they are Covid-positive. I was eating well and in fact put on weight,” he chuckles.


