Covid-19 scare: Tamil Nadu boards prevention train, government orders shutdown
2020-03-17
CHENNAI: At least 20 passengers who landed at the Chennai airport from seven countries on Monday were taken to a government quarantine centre – a health department training centre in Ponnamallee — by the directorate of public health and family welfare.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

The centre, which can board 50 people, is now acting as a quarantine centre for passengers coming from China, Democratic Republic of Korea, France, Germany, Spain, Italy and Iran, as per the new protocol issued by the Union health ministry. “As per the new protocol, those with flu-like symptoms will be sent to hospitals for isolation. But those who are above 60 years or those who have hypertension, diabetes or asthma will be monitored daily for 14 days in the quarantine centre even if they don’t have symptoms,” joint director of public health Dr P Sampath said. For people in this category, the collectors have identified buildings that can accommodate up to 100 people in each district. In Chennai, a new building is coming up at the Tambaram sanatorium.

From Wednesday, the compulsory quarantine will extend to passengers coming from/transiting through UAE, Qatar, Oman, and Kuwait. The centre has said that travel of passengers from member countries of the European Union, the European Free Trade Association, Turkey and United Kingdom to India is prohibited from Wednesday.

The health team is also briefing people in the low risk category about symptoms, precautions and need for home quarantine. They will be monitored by the integrated disease surveillance programme network for a fortnight.

On Monday, the state saw the highest number of people under hospital isolation. The state recorded 22 people under hospital isolation and 2,221 others who were on 28-day home quarantine. “On Monday, we took maximum number of samples from passengers who were showing symptoms. Doctors at the Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital (RGGH) took 32 samples on Monday, taking the total number of samples to 128,” said health minister C Vijaya Baskar. The condition of the Covid-positive patient admitted to the RGGH is stable, he said.

Sample is taken when passengers who have a travel history or people who came in contact with Covid- positive patients show symptoms of the disease. “Besides this, as per the standard guidelines, we have done random screening of 22 patients who were admitted at the hospital. All of them tested negative,” he said. Besides King Institute for preventive medicine in Guindy, the state has increased the number of testing centres at Theni, Tiruvarur and Tirunelvelli. “Chennai will get its second lab in RGGH,” he said. Besides airports, screening is being done at seaports and railway stations, he said.

(Important numbers: Control room landline: 044-29510400, 044-29510500; Mobile: 9444340496, 8754448477)


