Tamil Nadu government to cap treatment cost for Covid-19 in private hospitals
2020-06-04
CHENNAI: In a move to prevent profiteering by private hospitals, the state health department is planning to cap inpatient treatment cost for Covid-19 patients at Rs 7,500 to Rs 22,500 a day by invoking provisions of the Epidemic Diseases Act. Hospitals found overcharging patients will face action including closure, health minister C Vijayabaskar said.

At a meeting chaired on Wednesday by the minister in which senior officials including health secretary Beela Rajesh took part, it was decided that Rs 7,500 will be the maximum charge a day for treatment at general wards of private hospitals that offer tertiary care, Rs 15,000 for ICU care in such hospitals and Rs 22,500 in cases where life-saving equipment such as ventilators are used. “We are planning to make this an all-inclusive (rate). Hospitals can fix any rate below this amount,” the minister said. “If patients, however, want to get themselves admitted to deluxe rooms or suits, charges will be separate,” he said. 

According to officials, if patients require expensive drugs for treatment of comorbidities and other complications, hospitals may charge them. The state government, he said, wanted to ensure hospitals continue treatment without facing losses. “We want all doctors and health staff to wear protective gear while attending to patients,” he said.

Earlier this week, after some reports said some private hospitals were collecting up to Rs 3 lakh as advance from families even before admitting Covid-19 patients, Vijayabaskar said the state had received complaints about some hospitals fleecing patients. He said the state will soon cap prices for both testing and treatment.

Two days ago, after discussions with private laboratories over videoconference, he said the cost for RT-PCR test will be reduced by at least Rs 1,500 in the state. Currently, labs are permitted to charge up to Rs 4,500 for the test. “We told them that they would be required to do more tests in the coming months and hence they should not charge more than Rs 3,000. If labs are doing home tests, they can charge Rs 500 more,” he said.

Senior health officials said the state will soon issue a formal order. While testing and treatment for the infection is free in government hospitals, CM’s health insurance scheme beneficiaries can use their cashless card at all empanelled hospitals for treatment. “Action, including closure of establishments, will be initiated against hospitals and labs in case of violation. There should be no profiteering during a pandemic,” Vijayabaskar said.

Private hospitals and doctors’ bodies including the IMA have urged the state government to ensure supply of PPEs and testing kits for private hospitals at government rate. “The biggest component of medical bills are these kits,” they said. 

The state is also working on a dashboard to publicise details on number of patients being treated at government and public hospitals and number of beds and cost of treatment at each hospital. “The numbers on the board will be dynamic and will be changed on a real-time basis. This will help people make informed choices,” a senior health official said.


