Tamil Nadu puts interstate borders on vigil as precaution against coronavirus
2020-02-02
CHENNAI: Hotels and eateries have been asked to serve properly cooked meat and ensure chefs follow hygiene protocols while handling meat and other animal products in the kitchen as part of the state’s precautions against the coronavirus, director of public health Dr K Kolandaisamy said.


The state food safety department directed hotel managements to ensure hygeinic handling of meat products. The World Health Organisation and Centre for Disease Control have said there are chances of the virus spreading from uncooked meat. “With many people coming into the city we have to ensure there is no cross infection. Passengers are being quarantined at home to ensure minimal chances of transmission,” Dr Kolandaisamy said.

More than 700 passengers from China, including four from Wuhan, were put on the mandatory 28-day home quarantine by the state health department till Saturday evening. Earlier, health secretary Beela Rajesh said 579 passengers, including 68 Chinese citizens, were on quarantine By Saturday evening 150 more passengers landed at various airports. While samples – nasal swab and blood – were taken from flyers from Wuhan, all other passengers from China and other affected areas were screened and put on mandatory home quarantine. 

Health minister C Vijaya Baskar told reporters in Pudukottai that no one has shown symptoms — cough, cold, fever and running nose — of the novel virus. “Besides air and sea ports, inter-state borders are under vigil. It is a challenging task for us. Passengers with travel history to China entering TN from other states are also being screened,” he said.

The condition of two patients, who came to government hospitals in Chennai and Tiruvannamalai fearing infection, was stable he said. “They are being monitored because they said they had a travel history and complained of discomfort. They have not shown any symptoms of the viral disease,” said the minister. 

On Friday, joint director (Epidemic), directorate of public health and preventive medicine Dr P Sampath inspected the preventive measures in place and the special novel coronavirus isolation ward at the Government Rajaji Hospital.

One of the students M Chandrasekaran of Hosur told reporters there’s no panic in China as reported in the media. “I was instructed to return to college on February 21,” said the 21-year-old pursuing fourth year medicine in China.

The state has set up round-the-clock control rooms that can be reached at 044-29510400/044-29510500 or 94443 40496/87544 48477. People can also dial the state helpline 104 for queries.

Chennai airport is also screening passengers from China, said a senior AAI official. Thermal screening machines have been deployed along with hand-held infrared thermometres. 


