Tamil Nadu suggests Ayush remedies, yoga to take on coronavirus
2020-04-24
CHENNAI: The Tamil Nadu government on Thursday launched Aarokyam, a special programme that suggests Ayush interventions for Covid-19. It has recommended a 60ml to 90ml dose of kabasura kudineer/nilavembu kudineer for adults once a day for a month to boost their immunity against Covid-19 among other measures.

This follows recommendations from an expert group consisting of Dr MGR Medical University vice-chancellor Sudha Seshayyan and Ayush experts. "The Ayush interventions are immunity boosters to fight Covid-19 following the guidelines of Ayush ministry," said Indian Medicine and Homeopathy director S Ganesh.

To keep the immune system ready for infectious diseases, the committee has suggested measures under each discipline. For instance, 10 grams of kooshbanda rasayanam/agasthaya rasayanam have been recommended twice a day after food. The naturopathy system suggests 50ml of natural immunity-boosting hot drinks made from crushed ginger, tulsi, black pepper, adhimadhuram and turmeric twice a day for adults and a 20ml dose for children twice daily. Yoga therapy such as vajrasanas, bhastrika pranayama, bhramari pranayama, quick relaxation and deep relaxation techniques, kriyas can be tried for prevention and management of the infection.Bryonia Alba, Rhus Toxicodendron, Belladonna Gelsemium Eupatorium have been suggested in homeopathy.

G Sivaraman, member of the National Institute of Siddha scientific advisory committee, said the need of the hour was to strengthen immunity. "We need functional food, better lifestyle, nutraceuticals and traditional herbal medicine. Since coronavirus is new to us, it is going to be difficult, but we can fight it by boosting immunity," said Sivaraman, also a member of the TN government’s task force for Covid-19. 

Those testing positive can have dasamoola katuthrayam, indhu kantham and viyagriyadhi herbal drink after treatment.

An order issued by health secretary Beela Rajesh said Siddha treatment was a supplementary and therapeutic intervention along with allopathic treatment for mild Covid-19 asymptomatic patients. "The holistic approach of Ayush systems of medicine focuses on prevention through lifestyle modification, diet management, prophylactic interventions for improving the immunity and simple remedies based on presentation of symptoms," she said. 


