Tamil Nadu coronavirus toll now 17; 43 new cases
2020-04-21
CHENNAI: A 57-year-old Covid-19 positive man died at a private hospital and the state recorded 43 new cases on Monday. This took the total number of cases recorded in TN so far to 1,520 and the death toll to 17.


For the second consecutive day, Chennai recorded the highest number of cases in the state – 18 on Monday - while Pudukottai recorded its first positive case.


 Coronavirus live updates 

Thirteen other districts recorded less than five cases each. Health minister C Vijayabaskar said of the 43 new cases, 23 belonged to the Tablighi Jamaat cluster. Forty-six people were discharged. While 46 people were discharged, taking the total number of people discharged to 457, there were 1,043 active cases in various hospitals across the state. 

“Six of them are sick requiring support systems such as oxygen. Most patients are asymptomatic,” he said.

The state, he said, has ramped up testing across all 33 labs, including 22 in the government sector. “We are doing RT-PCR tests for diagnosis. We will soon be adding facilities to do cartridge-based nucleic acid amplification test -- a molecular diagnostic test for TB (identifies DNA in TB bacteria) – for diagnosis of Covid-19,” he said. The central government will supply cartridges, which will help the state get results in about 45 minutes, in a less cumbersome but efficient method of testing, he said.

The state has tested 46,985 samples on Monday using RT-PCR compared to 40,876 on Sunday, he said. “In addition we are doing tests with the rapid antibody testing kits. Most samples are testing negative. We will not be able to announce the number of positive samples unless these people undergo a confirmatory PCR test,” he said.

The state, he said had followed all norms in procuring rapid antibody kits. “Chhattisgarh has made fresh orders after the previous vendor declined to supply the order because it was not viable. AP has bought kits for a much higher price,” he pointed out.


