TN’s flower growers wilt under lockdown impact
2020-04-18
Chennai: Every day, by 9am, Banumathi Muthu would be ready with a despatch of aromatic jasmine flowers from her farm. But since the Covid-19 lockdown, this source of income for the single woman heading a family of four has dried up. Banumathi is among the more than 1.5 lakh flower growers in Tamil Nadu.

One of the largest producers of loose flowers in India, Tamil Nadu’s major crops include the iconic jasmine besides rose, chrysanthemum, marigold, crossandra, nerium and tuberose. These are the main cash crops for smallholder farmers in many parts of the state. With more than 32,400 hectares under floriculture and production of 482,500 tonnes in 2017-18, Tamil Nadu contributes to about 25% of the national loose flower production. The state’s export earnings of flowers (loose and cut) stood at Rs240.81 crore in 208-19.

With jasmine occupying nearly 39% and rose 22% of the total cultivated area, the majority of it is for export and trade to other states. For the remaining flowers, the market is largely within the state and its neighbouring areas.

On an average, the area under flower cultivation by a farmer ranges from 200sqm to 4,000sqm based on the availability of family labour, choice of crop and access to irrigation. Given these estimated costs, the average loss per hectare for floriculture for 30 days of lockdown during the peak flowering season is around Rs2 lakh (see table).

Banumathi is at a loss. "I usually get around Rs2,000 per day, sometimes more during the Muhurtham season. We were satisfied with what we had," she said. Not far from Banumathi’s farm is the slightly larger farm of Mathiyalagan in Alangudi, Pudukkottai district. Usually Mathiyalagan’s family of five would pitch in for the peak season that begins in March transporting about 20kg-25kg flowers to the commission agent. "There’s nothing now. I can take my two-wheeler and try to reach a buyer but when there are no weddings or private ceremonies and religious places are shut, there are no possibilities to find buyers for flowers. I understand this lockdown is for our health but I’m worried about our farm’s health and at a total loss as to what I can do." Beyond the farm, those affected include farm hands, those vending flowers, workers making and selling garlands, all of whom are losing daily wages in the range of Rs200 – Rs1,200.

While guidelines for agricultural produce have been issued to facilitate movement of harvested fruits, vegetables and other produce under essential commodities, floriculture has not been addressed yet. 

Apart from cancelled events, flower such as jasmine and marigold processed for their chemical constituents are also lying around due to the closure of processing units. The impact of the lockdown will be felt long after it ends as the wilting and falling flowers are likely to affect farms. When farmers don’t harvest flowers, poor field sanitation and plant health can lead to buildup of pests and diseases like jasmine bud worm, blight, wilt and root rot, nematode attack in crossandra, tube rose, rust and scales in rose and root rot in marigold and chrysanthemum. To tackle this some farmers are pruning, which is usually done in June. This means a definite income loss until June, instead of it being the peak season. 

Since flowers are the significant cash crop of almost one whole season for small farmers, it will impact investment in the next crop cultivation. Based on field assessments, experts including B Selvamukilan and R Rajkumar of M S Swaminathan Research Foundation recommend immediate and mid-term measures which begin with assessment of loss that farmers have incurred to work out compensation protocols and payment structure to rebuild confidence of farmers.

This needs to be followed up with providing necessary agro-advisories to maintain good field conditions and plant health, so that productivity is maintained. Ensuring availability of quality seeds and cuttings for the coming season will help farmers get a better start.

In the mid-term, the state should help establish essential oil extraction units in hubs where jasmine, tube rose and marigold are predominant, so that there can be an ancillary income.

For now, Banumathi is encouraging girls in her village to help themselves to the jasmine in her fields and decorate their hair. "At least some of it won’t go waste," she says. "We have always been independent and even now we are not looking for compensation but some support to carry on our livelihood will help. I don’t know how and whether we will ever recover" 

(The authors work with the M S Swaminathan Research Foundation)


