TN’s rural economy could hold answer to post-Covid blues
2020-04-18
With the government declaring a lock down due to Covid-19, the country witnessed a mass movement of daily workers from cities and towns back to villages. This raises the question why our rural setups are not enough to provide jobs and financial stability. 

Thousands of people choose to work in factories, in small urban establishments and as house help when generations before them have been working in self-sufficient villages. In the process, many of their skills passed down generations are lost. This trend has to be reversed. Post the lockdown, the migration to urban areas would again happen but to arrest that, the state should build grassroots infrastructure so that the villages can provide lucrative employment through agroforestry, trees, biodiversity and nature-based economy.

Rural development needs a new impetus, so that the youth are encouraged to stay in their villages. The workers who have returned could come to the rescue of rural economy. 

The post Covid-19 crisis requires a new thinking for livelihood security. With too many mouths to feed, agriculture cannot be the only focus area. Development of agroforestry, horticulture, fisheries, animal husbandry and allied sectors is the need of the hour. The strength of youth and women in the rural areas can be harnessed towards this end. It is time this country relies on forestry, trees and biodiversity for economic security. There are many economically important trees and forest genetic resources (FGRs) that assures sustained economic growth. FGRs are variations in trees and other woody plant species, having potential economic, environmental value. The economic value includes timber, pulp wood, fuel, biofuel and other uses. 

The youth should be encouraged to invest their energy in building agroforestry models that can provide sustainable income. 

We have more than 2,500 tree species in the country but only 130 species have been domesticated for economic benefits. The youth can not only be engaged for the protection of our varied biodiversity, but also can help augment biodiversity resources. The next social movement can rightly happen in villages, if our focus shifts to rural areas with more reliance on agriculture and horti-silviculture-based economy. Along with smart cities, we need to plan for smart villages which will support robust agroforestry models. There is a need for lifestyle changes too. Our obsession of cars, gadgets and consumables has to give way to a healthy relationship with the earth and its natural resources. 

(The writer is a retired principal chief conservator of forest and head of forest force in TN)


