TNSCB tenement in Pulianthope now 1,400-bed Covid care facility
2020-05-31
CHENNAI: Greater Chennai Corporation has converted the Kesava Perumal Park (K P Park) slum clearance board tenement in Pulainthope as one of the Covid care centres. 

With 1,400 bed capacity, medical teams and oxygen supply at all floors, this mini hospital-like facility will strive to create a home-like environment, said health minister C Vijayabaskar. 

This care centre is located in Pulianthope in Thiru-Vi-Ka Nagar zone (zone 6), one of the highly infected zones in the city. 

"We have taken over the new buildings and allotted one block to each government medical college in the city. The buildings itself will be like a containment area," said the minister. 

Explaining about the facilities that will be in place, the minister said that the buildings will be monitored 24/7 by CCTV cameras and that every floor will have a medical team along with rooms for nurses, paramedical and technical staff. 

There will also be separate space for storage of PPE kits and a computer room for data entry operations. 

The care centre will also have lift facility for patients and doctors and oxygen supply in all floors. From Saturday, patients with mild symptoms and those without comorbidities will be admitted in this care centre. "Who is eligible for admission here will be decided by the medical teams," the minister said. 

Apart from this, the corporation has also set up fever outpatient wards in all its 140 primary health care centres. 

Pointing out the recent appointment of NGO outreach workers to work with the civic body in the slums, the minister said the government has been reaching to the door of the public. He, however appealed to not feel stigmatised and asked people to come forward. "We are also coming to your doors. If you choose to come when you have symptoms, we can control the spread," Vijayabaskar said. 

Civic body officials said the new care centre will have adequate facilities in place and would not backfire as happened at Chennai Trade Centre in Nandambakkam and colleges-turned-care centres.


