To beat ‘novel’ virus, Goans return to childhood favourites
2020-03-30
Panaji: From Ruskin Bond and Enid Blyton to the old editions of the Indian children’s magazine Chandamama, Goans are turning to their childhood favourites for comfort and cheer in the time of the lockdown necessitated by the Covid-19 threat. While some have purchased cloud readers like Kindle to read e-books, with public libraries currently out of bounds; others had already picked up the books on their to-read list from bookstores ahead of the lockdown, in anticipation of the government move, said bookstore owners.

An assistant professor, Jyoti Kiran Pisipati, has a full-time job and a family to take care of on a regular day. But the lockdown, she said, has given her the opportunity to pick up and re-read her childhood favourites, something she always wished to do. “Reading has a calming effect on me. I am using my time at home reading new books, as well as my childhood favourites. I have old issues of Chandamama, right from the 1970s. It's so much fun reading them all over again. Next in line are Enid Blyton's ‘Malory Towers’, which I had read when I was in school,” said Jyoti, a resident of Taleigao.

She said that among the new books she had picked up to read ahead of the lockdown was Michelle Obama’s ‘Becoming’, which Jyoti calls a ‘light’ and ‘stress-free’ read.

“Now, with the lockdown, I have no access to public libraries or the library of the college where I teach. This was the main source from where I used to pick up my reading material. I recently purchased a Kindle and I am finding it very convenient to download books and read from,” said Jyoti.

The owner of Broadway Bookstore in St Inez, Khalil Ahmad, said there was a sudden surge in purchase of books from his stores just before the curfew.

“It looked like people were aware of the lockdown. Three to four days before curfew was announced, there was a sudden spike in footfalls. People purchased lot of books, mostly children's books and light reading, mainly fiction. Some foreigners who live in Goa bought books worth Rs 8,000 to 9,000 each, which is not something that we see on a regular day,” said Ahmad.

Chicalim-based artist Kaushalya Gadekar said she has a stock of Ruskin Bond books lined up for reading during the period of lockdown. But she is currently reading Bond’s autobiography ‘Lone Fox Dancing’, which she hopes will help her better understand all his children’s and other books she has previously read.

She said reading helps transport her into another world and forget reality, at least for a while.

A research scholar at the department of international relations at Goa University, Volvoi-resident Yugank Naik is reading through literature in regional languages to help him get a better grasp of Goa’s current political scenario.

“I am reading ‘Jaagaryaache Kukare’, a Konkani book by Dr Narayan Desai and ‘Sushegad’, a Marathi book by Raju Nayak. The perspective of a regional language book on political science is totally different from a book written on the subject by intellectuals in English. I am trying to relate what I am reading to the current political ongoings in the state,” said Yugank.


