To retain Covid-free tag, Chandapur shuns recovered couple
2020-04-23
NAGPUR: A couple from Chandrapur has landed in institutional quarantine at Vanamati despite being discharged from GMCH on Wednesday following full recovery. The reason: Authorities in their home district want to eliminate the risk of spread of the coronavirus there and retain Covid-free status.


The couple was discharged from the Government Medical College and Hospital with dean Dr Sajal Mitra, medical superintendent Avinash Gawande, doctors and other staff giving a round of applause. The joy, however, was short-lived as the couple was taken to Vanamati and quarantined again.

Interestingly, the discharge card states both have recovered fully and need to be home quarantined for 14 days.

Nagpur collector Ravindra Thakre told TOI, “Chandrapur collector Kunal Khemnar requested us to keep the couple in institutional quarantine in Nagpur as Chandrapur has not reported any case till now. The additional 14-day institutional quarantine in Nagpur will help them.”

Khemnar said, “I am in touch with the couple. Guidelines say Covid-19 positive person will require hospital treatment till tested negative twice after completion of 14 days, followed by 14-day home quarantine after discharge.”

“The couple is coming from red zone (Nagpur). Just to be on safer side, we have taken a decision to keep both under institutional quarantine in Nagpur. Thereafter, we will bring them to Chandrapur after getting Covid-free certificate from Nagpur. Otherwise also, both would have been home quarantined for 14 days,” he said.

The husband, 39-year-old real estate businessman, told TOI, “We should be allowed home quarantine. We arrived in Nagpur on March 24 and our samples were not taken in time. I got myself tested on April 3 and reports came positive on April 6. We were shifted to GMCH where samples of my wife (32) were taken on April 8 and reports came positive on April 11. It has been almost 30 days since we arrived in the city.”

The two are among the four Tablighi Jamaat couples who had gone on a religious tour to Indonesia. All reached New Delhi on March 22. They stayed at Nizamuddin Markaz and landed in the city on March 24.

Remaining three couples had tested negative, completed institutional quarantine and returned to Chandrapur on Tuesday.

5 more likely to be discharged today: Five more persons are likely to get discharge from IGGMCH on Thursday. Person from housing society in front of Gandhisagar has reportedly tested negative on Wednesday. Two persons from Khamla and Jaripatka, along with their daughters, are also likely to get discharge on Thursday.

With Chandrapur couple, till now 14 positive persons have been discharged. One of them — cap seller from Mominpura — has been quarantined again at MLA Hostel for not following home quarantine.


