Covid-19 scare in Goa: To stay afloat, hoteliers slash tariffs, woo locals
2020-03-14
PANAJI: Hotels across the board slashed tariffs after the state government suspended all tourist visas to contain further spread of Covid-19. Occupancy at hotels had dropped slightly following booking cancellations amid the coronavirus crises during the last fortnight, but the latest development has compelled hotel operators to cut tariffs even further to keep them afloat for the next two months.


While five-star hotels have reduced their rates by 25-30 %, the drop in tariffs of three-star properties is sharper. Non-starred hotels and guest houses have gone ahead and halved their rates. To stay afloat in these distressing times, some hotels operators have even chosen to woo the local population by offering attractive packages. 

Confirming this, Travel and Tourism Association (TTAG) president, Savio Messias, said while starred hotels always offered brunch deals aimed at locals, the packages have been broadened to include overnight stays as well. 

Francisco de Braganca, a hotelier based in North Goa, said ‘rationalisation of tariff’ was now the mantra. “Hotels that reacted immediately after the Centre suspended all tourist visas will be able to safeguard their interests to some extent,” he said. Braganca also said that although the situation is fluid, it remains difficult to predict if the condition will improve or only deteriorate further.

Over the past decade, Goa has also become popular as a meeting, incentives, conferences and exhibitions (MICE) destination. Corporates events that have been held here during the monsoon have resulted in a considerable spike in hotel occupancy during the lean period. But Ralf de Souza, another North Goa-based hotelier, said this segment did not do well itself during the last monsoon, thanks to the economic slump. “As corporates cut costs, fewer conferences and exhibitions were held in the state,” he said.

Under normal circumstances, Goa sees good tourist footfalls in April and May. While the domestic and foreign tourist flow generally ebbs by the first week of May, de Souza feels that the number of domestic holidaymakers, too, will dwindle earlier than usual due to Covid-19 fears. 

“The government has advised against mass gatherings, and we haven’t received many booking inquiries from domestic visitors so far,” he said, indicating that the next three months could be bleak for tourism-dependent trades. 

Braganca, however, said a lot will depend on how the Covid-19 scenario unfolds across India. “A cautious approach is the need of the hour during these trying times,” he said. 

