To soften coronavirus blow, Delhi government increases ration, doubles pensions
2020-03-22
NEW DELHI: With the spread of novel coronavirus restricting the movement of people and affecting their livelihood, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal, in his first digital press conference on Saturday, announced a slew of measures, including free foodgrains for about 72 lakh beneficiaries, doubling the pension amounts for senior citizens, widows and differently-abled, and providing free meals to the homeless at night shelters in April.


Kejriwal also increased the quantity of wheat, rice and sugar given through the public distribution system by oneand-a-half times, restricted the number of people gathering at one place from the existing 20 to five and waived the tax on hotels where quarantine arrangements had been made.


 
The chief minister also warned people that the city could be completely locked down if the need arose to ensure “safety and security” of the people of Delhi and the country. He urged senior citizens to give up their morning walks and isolate themselves even in their own houses. Stressing on social distancing, he said, “Only you can save yourself from coronavirus. You must give up shaking hands and must wash your hands multiple times, maintain a distance from others and stay at home as much as possible. That’s how we can save ourselves and our families from Covid-19.”

Meanwhile, food and civil supplies minister Imran Hussain said face masks, gloves, soaps and hand sanitisers, which have been declared essential commodities, could be sold at fair price shops.

The chief minister said the recent restrictions were putting a financial burden on the poor and daily wage labourers. The government had initially thought of setting up kitchens to provide them free food but it would have resulted in mass gatherings. “We have decided to provide 7.5kg free foodgrains to 72 lakh people through PDS to beneficiaries attached to our ration scheme for one month. We will start distributing ration for April from March 30. I would request people to maintain a distance of one metre between each other in ration queues,” he said.

Kejriwal said his government had decided to double the pension to 2.5 lakh widows, five lakh senior citizens and one lakh differentlyabled. The beneficiaries will get the pension amount for March and April by April 7.

“Corona restrictions causing terrible financial stress to poor. Following decisions taken to provide them relief. Rs 4000- 5000 pension will be paid to 8.5 lakh beneficiaries by 7 Apr. 2. Free rations, with 50% more quantity than normal entitlements, to 72 lakh beneficiaries,” he tweeted. “We are also arranging free lunch and dinner at 220 night shelters,” the CM added.

Kejriwal said the government had strengthened the ban on public gatherings by reducing the number of people allowed to gather at one spot from 20 to five. “The orders will be issued soon. In case there is a queue, people are requested to maintain a distance of five metres between each other,” he said.

The chief minister added that if people followed the dos and don’ts — such as not shaking hands, regularly washing hands, social distancing and staying at home — they will be able to save themselves and their families from coronavirus.

He urged senior citizens to remain indoors and skip morning walks for the time being.

