Tobacco addiction one of biggest public health threats in Covid times
2020-05-31
WORLD NO TOBACCO DAY

Nagpur: Vidarbha is infamous for Kharra, a tobacco mix, and Nagpur is termed as ‘Kharra Capital’ by anti-tobacco activists in the country. Harmful effects of tobacco on physical and mental health are well known. Yet, tobacco, in its various forms, enjoys wide popularity and cultural acceptance.

In the backdrop of Covid-19 pandemic, tobacco addiction is one of the biggest public health threats the world has ever faced, killing more than eight million people annually. More than seven million of those deaths are the result of direct tobacco use while around 1.2 million are the result of non-smokers being exposed to second-hand smoke.

According to experts at AIIMS Nagpur, the number of users of tobacco in its varied forms surpass alcohol and other drugs by a great margin. Latest additions to this variety are e-cigarettes and shisha or hookahs. Even though knowledge of deadly effects of tobacco is commonplace and warnings are printed on packets, it is one of the hardest addictions to quit. 

“Latest figures indicate that more than 20% of Indians have moderate to high tobacco dependence. Easy availability is one of the prime reasons behind unsuccessful quitting resolutions year after year,” said Dr Suyog Jaiswal, associate professor, department of psychiatry, AIIMS Nagpur.

Even the way tobacco is portrayed in popular media, including movies, makes it an appealing novelty for the youth and a “cool fad” to the impressionable minds, say experts.

“The reason of this helpless cycle of tobacco use goes beyond peer pressure or social obligations. Prolonged tobacco use changes the neurochemistry of the human brain irreversibly, because of which it qualifies as a disorder rather than just a habit,” Dr Sreelakshmi V, assistant professor at AIIMS. 

With professional help comprising of therapy, behaviour modifications and or medications, one can achieve successful abstinence. 

“Simple interventions such as buying one cigarette at a time, decreasing the frequency and quantity of tobacco, setting a quit date etc can help one begin the journey towards abstinence. Medicines like nicotine chewing gums, patches etc can help with the craving and withdrawal that occurs on stopping tobacco,” said Dr Sonakshi Jyrwa, assistant professor, department of psychiatry, AIIMS.


