Tobacco, in any form, puts you at Covid-19 risk: Experts
2020-05-30
NAGPUR: Those who are waiting lockdown to end and rush to their favourite ‘paan stall’ to have kharra should think twice before doing so. Tobacco, in any of its forms, helps novel coronavirus (Covid-19) to enter and settle in your body, warned experts as they spoke to TOI on the eve of World No Tobacco Day, which is to be observed on May 31.


“Evidence suggests that smoking is associated with increased severity of the disease and death in hospitalized Covid-19 patients. As a lung specialist, I would recommend that tobacco users stop smoking as it leads to decreased immunity, long-term lung disease and higher chances of catching an infection, including Covid-19,” said intervention pulmonologist Dr Sameer Arbat.

A review of studies by public health experts convened by World Health Organization (WHO) in April found that smokers are more likely to develop severe complications with Covid-19, compared to non-smokers.

“Smoking is a known risk factor for many respiratory infections. Basically, tobacco increases severity of respiratory diseases. Covid-19 primarily attacks lungs and smoking impairs lung functioning making it harder for the body to fight off the virus,” said Dr Arbat. 

Tobacco is also a major risk factor for non-communicable diseases like cardiovascular disease, cancer, respiratory disease and diabetes. “People with heart disease and diabetic conditions are at higher risk of developing severe illness when they get infected by Covid-19, so, it would be best for all of them to quit tobacco in any form even post lockdown,” said Dr Sunil Gupta.

De-addiction activists are terming Covid-19 time as an opportunity. “It’s best time to quit tobacco. If you can manage without tobacco or for that matter any addiction for three weeks at a stretch, you are almost on the verge of quitting it. Many have managed without kharra or cigarette during the lockdown. Such people should not restart the addiction now,” said Amrut Gandhe, de-addiction activist.

Findings of a nationwide survey conducted by Foundation for a Smoke-Free World also back this claim. This survey states that 72% of India’s combustible tobacco users between the ages of 18-24 years have attempted to quit smoking during the lockdown. More than 69% tobacco users between the ages of 25-39 also attempted to quit tobacco.

Academicians have now taken it as a subject of study. “There has been a visible change in people’s lifestyle during the lockdown. Many of us have quit addictions and adopted healthy habits. Our university will conduct a statewide study of these changes soon,” said a senior official of Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University (YCMOU). 


