Tobacco users more likely to contract Covid
2020-06-01
Bhopal: In a move to curb rising tobacco consumption, especially among youths and children, the National Centre for Human Settlements and Environment (NCHSE) has urged the state government to implement tobacco vendor licencing rules on World No Tobacco Day, here on Sunday. 

In the backdrop of the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, NCHSE director Pradip Nandi reiterated that the World Health Organisation (WHO) has also warned that smokers are at a higher risk to get infected with coronavirus. 

“As per the guidelines issued by the Union ministry of home affairs (MHA) dated April 24, the state government through the districts magistrate of Bhopal had issued orders for completely prohibiting the use of tobacco and spitting in public places to prevent the spread of Covid-19. It stated that ban on tobacco products should continue even after the lockdown period”, Nandi said. 

The international research unit at the Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids recently produced a factsheet on the evidence that justifies concerns about smoking and vaping amid the coronavirus pandemic. It highlights what is known about the effects of smoking and vaping on the respiratory system and immunity as well as the causal relationship between smoking and non-communicable diseases. It also highlights two strong study finding that smokers carry greater risk of experiencing more severe progression of Covid-19, including death. 

The theme of World No Tobacco Day 2020 is ‘Protecting youth from industry manipulation and preventing them from tobacco and nicotine use’. The aim is to sensitise and make youngsters aware of the harmful effects of tobacco use and expose the tactics employed by the cigarette industry to attract them. Through this campaign, the WHO encourages everyone to gain knowledge, spread awareness, and create a ‘tobacco-free generation’. 

*** 

DEADLY ADDICTION 

Gfx 

Prohibition on sale of tobacco and related products should continue even after the lockdown period to help save lives 

13.5 lakh tobacco related deaths occur each year in India of which about 91,000 people die due to tobacco-related ailments in Madhya Pradesh alone 

In order to comply with Sections 4,5,6 and 7 of the Cigarette and Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply, and Distribution) Act, 2003 (COTPA), the department of urban development (Madhya Pradesh) issued a circular on September 20, 2018 and directed all urban local bodies to develop a mechanism to provide permission/authorisation/ vendor licencing to retail shops selling tobacco products with restriction on sale on non-tobacco products such as candies, chips, soft drinks, etc. 

Law prohibits sale of tobacco to minors and within 100 yards of educational institutions 

The mechanism of vendor licencing is yet to be enforced 


