Covid-19 outbreak: Toddy auction completed in four Kerala districts amid protests
2020-03-19
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM/KOCHI/MALAPPURAM/ALAPPUZHA: Violating the government’s directive against gatherings in the wake of the Covid-19 outbreak, toddy shops were auctioned in five districts amid protests. Protests by the Youth Congress disrupted the process in Kannur.


Auctions in Thiruvananthapuram, Ernakulam, Alappuzha and Malappuram were completed on Wednesday amid unruly scenes. The existing licence for toddy shops expires on March 31. 

There are 5,000-odd toddy shops in the state, and since they are generally not profitable, the government offered licences to existing licensees at last year’s rates. With a licence selling for Rs 10,000 to Rs 1 lakh, the government decided that it will be handed over to those expressing interest. And if there is more than one applicant, the winner would be picked through a draw. “We have completed the sale in four districts. Since the sale in Kannur was disrupted, it will be held another day,” excise commissioner S Aananthakrishnan said. 

In the next phase, on Friday, shops in Kollam, Kottayam, Thrissur and Kozhikode will be auctioned. 

In Ernakulam, nearly 641 shops were auctioned. The process, at the Collectorate, was temporarily halted when journalists entered the hall. The collector intervened and the auction was shifted to the excise divisional office in Kacherippady, where it continued till evening.

A group of Youth Congress workers staged a protest in front of the divisional office. They barged into the auction hall and staged a sit-in alleging that there were no precautions taken by officers. Central police rushed to the spot and shifted the protesters and locked the gates. Some of the workers climbed over the walls of the office complex and tried to re-enter the office. They were arrested.

In Malappuram, authorities were forced to temporarily stop the auction process at the Collectorate following protests. Around 50 persons attended the auction.

In Alappuzha, a large number of people attended the auction for nine ranges at the excise department office. Youth Congress and Kerala Students Union members took out a march demanding the auction postponement. They were removed from the venue by cops. 


