Kolkata: Tollywood stakeholders to decide on post-lockdown shooting norms
2020-06-02
KOLKATA: Tollywood producers have come together to formulate guidelines to be followed once shooting commences in Bengal. A meeting will be held with all stakeholders at the Technicians’ Studio on Tuesday to discuss precautionary measures. 


On Sunday, the Maharashtra government had issued certain guidelines and Bengal producers have gone through them to check if they can be adapted here as well. One rule mentioned that any person found Covid-positive during a shoot should be given treatment. 



Asked about payment of compensation, chief advisor of Federation of Western India Cine Employees and the president of the Indian Film and Television Directors’ Association Ashoke Pandit said, “It is the producers’ responsibility to look after everyone on the set and take care of their treatment if they get infected. Producers have to discuss with the broadcaster on how the payment will be made to the affected person. As for money required for treatment and compensation in case of fatality, we are yet to finalize the amount. The Maharashtra guidelines have made it compulsory for every set to have a doctor, nurse and an ambulance. In the current situation where doctors aren’t available even during emergencies, it will be very difficult to implement that since we have some 40 shoots daily. We want the government to rethink that.”

Piya Sengupta, president of Eastern India Motion Pictures Association, said, “Treatment is important if anyone is infected. But we can’t control where someone goes after pack-up. So how can we be sure the person was infected on set? If someone falls ill, our producers will not be able to pay compensation.” In this context, some feel that the health insurance cover given by the Bengal government to the industry members might become a crucial factor in today’s discussion. Actor Shankar Chakraborty, who is the working president of West Bengal Motion Picture Artists' Forum and will be attending Tuesday's meeting, said the role of the broadcaster will become most crucial in case of payment of compensation to infected people on television sets.
Sengupta, however, is keen on following the Maharashtra guidelines on how to deal with the untoward situation of having an infected person on the sets. The guidelines mention that the sets have to be fumigated and sanitized extensively and shooting has to be immediately stalled for three days. It also mentions that “any cast/crew member above the age of 65 will not be allowed on the site”. In addition, even a pregnant employee or one who has a pregnant spouse will not be allowed on the sets till further orders. However, Pandit said that they have already written to the Maharashtra government to rethink on the age cap of 65 years. “Fifty per cent of our film and television industry comprises people above 65. That includes the likes of Amitabh Bachchan, Naseeruddin Shah, Paresh Rawal, Priyadarshan, David Dhawan, Anupam Kher and Shabana Azmi. 

 Sengupta, however, is keen on following the age restrictions. “We also want to restrict shooting with children below the age of 10,” she said. 

