Ahmedabad: Tossed between hospitals, Covid-19 patient loses life
2020-05-16
AHMEDABAD: Aijaz Saiyad, a resident of Gomtipur, was teary-eyed on Friday while narrating the two-day ordeal he and his father, Hasnuddin, 67, had to go through for two days. Hasnuddin died while in an ambulance on Thursday evening while being ferried from Civil Hospital to Tapan Hospital in Anandnagar.

Saiyad said that they regularly went to Narayana Hospital in Rakhial for his father’s dialysis. On May 12, they went to the hospital for the procedure when the temperature scanner detected his father’s mild fever. “Being a Covid-19 designated hospital, I said that they can treat him as a suspected patient and start treatment, but the hospital authorities said that they cannot and asked us to get a test done. Surprisingly, the doctors did not agree to give us the test and we had to get it done by another GP,” he said.

On second day, they managed to get the test results after much of an ordeal and again approached the hospital. “My father had tested positive. The hospital told us that they were full and could not admit my father,” said Saiyed.

Abhijit CP, facility director at Narayana Hospital, told TOI that they could not admit Saiyed as he was not a Covid-19 patient according to protocol. “When they came the next day, it’s possible that all of our 27 beds may have been occupied,” he added.

In need of dialysis, the father-son duo went to GCS near Chamunda Bridge where they were told that if the person is Covid-19 positive, he would be treated for that only. They then went to Sola Civil Hospital. As the complications worsened, they were referred to Civil Hospital on May 14. 

The experience at the biggest Covid-19 treatment centre was far from satisfactory as they were allegedly asked to wait, and told that the dialysis could start only after intervention of a doctor at the Civil Hospital campus known to them. The experience prompted the family again to find an alternative in private sector. They talked to Tapan Hospital after which they agreed to admit him and look after his dialysis complications.

“I don’t know whether Covid-19, his already deteriorating health conditions or the sheer apathy from multiple fronts killed my father. I just wish no positive patient has to undergo what we have been through,” said Saiyed.


