Total lockdown won’t build immunity: Experts
2020-05-01
LUCKNOW: Should lockdown be lifted on May 3? Experts in Lucknow feel the exit strategy should be to ease services in crucial economic areas through periodical and partial lockdown, which will keep Covid-19 under check as well.

Former head of microbiology at SGPGI Lucknow, Prof T N Dhole said “Any virus only gets controlled when at least 80% of the population becomes immune to it, hence absolute lockdown will not help people in developing ‘herd immunity’ against it. This immunity is achieved only when a certain number of people are allowed to move out in their environment but not gather together.”

“Hence, lockdown can be partially lifted for three days where people are allowed to move out from 8am to 6pm. Thereafter, strict lockdown should be enforced again but its duration should be based on cases reported during the gap. However, before lifting lockdown, administration should do a rehearsal of swift action in case there is a surge of infection,” Prof Dhole said.Lockdown can be eased first in areas essential for growth to bring economy back on track, but due care should be taken to prevent any crowding while allowing people to work.

Former dean, quality and planning, KGMU, and professor of medicine, Dr S K Das said the situation is precarious and path of herd immunity has great risks.

“Flattening of infection curve with lockdown alone without bringing the disease to zero, only postpones its overall occurrence and deaths it may cause. Moreover, lockdown hurts economy hard, which cannot be overlooked. But, at the same time, lifting lockdown completely may lead to surge because there is no treatment or vaccine available as of now.”

“In such a scenario, India’s decision to mark red, yellow and green zones for gradually opening important economic activities seems to be the best alternative,” said Dr Das, who in a recent paper ‘Breaking the back of Covid-19 epidemic’ discussed lockdown exit strategy in detail. “Government can allow normal life in green zones and public movement for essentials in orange zones, while enforcing total restriction in red zone even if it requires use of police,” he added.


