Total lockdown in 12 hotspots, areas sealed
2020-04-09
Kanpur: The district administration on Wednesday identified 12 hotspots in the city under seven red zones, imposed total lockdown and sealed all these areas. The ten hotspots are in Kanpur Nagar while one each in Sajeti and Ghatampur.

Talking to mediapersons, district magistrate Brahmadeo Tiwari said that as per directions of the state government, the hotspots would be sealed and except medical and civil supplies, the entry and exit would be totally banned. The lockdown in other places of the city would continue with the ongoing restrictions.

He said that after video conferencing with the chief minister, the administration had identified twelve localities as hotspots. Some people associated with the Tablighi Jamaat were found there and their medical tests were found positive. The areas identified as hotspots are: Halim Muslim School, Chamanganj, Humayun Masjid, Colonelganj, Haji Inayat Masjid Quli Bazar, Hate Wali Masjid, Quli Bazar, Khair Masjid Machharia Naubasta, Naseemabad Masjid Machharia Naubasta, Madarsa Hidyatullah Machharia Nausbasta, Suffa Masjid Babupurwa, Bilal Masjid Munshipurwa, Qaziyani Masjid Ghatampur, Rahmania Masjid Ghatampur and Bari Masjid Baripal in Ghatampur.

The DM stated that no one, even mediapersons would be allowed to enter the hotspot areas. Mediapersons would be briefed daily by an officer deputed by the district administration. All lanes, connecting the main roads of these localities, would be barricaded so that nobody could come out from that area.

SSP/DIG Anant Deo said that the residents of these localities should prepare themselves to face some problems because there was no other alternative. “As per WHO guidelines, we are on the verge of the third phase and to check the epidemic, strict measures are must", he said.

He has appealed to the residents of the hotspot localities neither to come on roads nor go on the roofs and stay at homes. With their active cooperation, the city would come out from the danger zone, he added.

Meanwhile, divisional commissioner Sudhir M Bobde while inspecting the Kanshiram Hospital directed to convert it to the level-2 hospital within two days as this would not only increase the ICU and isolated beds but also ensure availability of medicines mandatory for a level-2 hospital.


