Tougher charges against 50 lockdown violators
2020-04-15
Kolkata: Majority of the lockdown violators, who were arrested in the city from Sunday to Monday evening, was slapped with the more stringent Disaster Management Act. At least 30 of the 70 police stations have registered specific charges under section 51 (b) of the act against 50-odd violators. 

According to sources, police stations got instructions from Lalbazar about enforcement of the act that, they said, will help them lay down the “exact ground, on which violators are arrested. Hence it will be easier for them to convince courts about the extent of violations.”

The act also allows the accused to be jailed up to two years – 1.6 years more than the maximum punishment under IPC section 188. In the past 18 days of the lockdown, the police have brought to book the violators under this section. 

“While IPC 188 deals with violations of government orders, ‘offences and penalties’ mentioned under Sections 51 to 60 of Disaster Management Act serves as an effective tool against those violating the lockdown and causing hindrances to prevention or containment of Coronavirus,” said a public prosecutor. 

He added that any court will have to take cognizance of the act for the first time.

However, the 50 arrests till Monday evening were made at police stations in north and central Kolkata like Tallah, Shyampukur, Girish Park, Bowbazar and Kasba, Hastings, Tangra, Survey Park and Purba Jadavpur in south and south suburban Kolkata. 

Most of these police stations are either in the 27 wards where surveillance has been stepped up or where lockdown violations have been reported. 

Rajabagan, where seven cops were injured while trying to enforce the lockdown, is also slapping violators with this section. 

The Section 51 (b) of the act states that if anyone refuses to comply with the direction given by Centre or state government or district authority, the person will be subjected to punishment with one-year imprisonment or with fine or both. 

In addition to this, if the refusal to comply with any direction results in loss of lives or imminent danger, the accused will be punishable with the period of imprisonment being extended up to two years. 

Earlier in the first week of April, Centre had directed states and union territories to book all violators under relevant provisions of the Disaster Management Act, 2005. In a letter to all chief secretaries, Union home Secretary Ajay Bhalla said the lockdown measures, issued on March 24, clearly mention that “any person violating the containment measures will be liable to be proceeded against as per the provisions of Section 51 to 60 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005, besides legal action under Section 188 of the IPC.” 


