Bihar: Tough to run old age homes, orphanages during lockdown
2020-04-15
PATNA: Orphanages and shelter homes for children, senior citizens and disabled people are facing a tough time during the lockdown owing to problems in supply of essential commodities and medicines. Scarcity of helping staff has added to their woes.

While people managing old age homes say they are taking extra precautions as the elderly are more prone to getting infected by Covid-19, authorities at shelter homes for disabled people say they are the worst sufferers. Few shelter homes claimed they were using funds saved for crisis situation, but that was also getting exhausted.

The orphanage and a house for destitute adjacent to Padri Ki Haveli run by the sisters of Missionaries of Charity formed by Mother Teresa in 1950 is also facing problems due to the lockdown. “The most difficult thing is buying grocery and other items for the inmates. There are too many people here to look after with money from our own pockets. We are trying our best to provide all necessary items to them. But if the lockdown extends, we would be in great trouble,” said a sister in charge of the orphanage, which has 70 children and old people.

Rajesh Kumar, who runs an old age home in Patliputra Colony, said the senior citizens were facing various difficulties due to the lockdown. “There are several diabetics who need proper walking and running everyday. However, due to the lockdown, they are not able to do their regular activities. Recently, we had to call for an emergency as blood sugar level of one of the inmates shot up very high,” he said.

Subodh Kumar Suman, secretary of Vishesh Giri Ashram, said he is facing difficulties in getting essential commodities. “There are 59 mentally challenged and disabled inmates and around 20 employees at our shelter home. Following the social distancing norms, we asked our staff to visit the shelter home on alternate day. Scarcity of helpers is a major issue,” he said.

Rakhi Sharma, the chief executive officer of a de-addiction centre and shelter home, said: “We aren’t admitting new patients due to unavailability of doctors and psychiatrists. Scarcity of staff has added to our problems in dealing with the in-house patients. We are also having problems in raising funds. As a result, the rent and other bills are due. We are just waiting for the lockdown to end as we are facing both mental and financial problems. The unavailability of basic food items and medicine has also been a big problem during this period.” Rakhi said many patients, who went back home in other districts, were finding difficulties in getting medicines.

Some are even trying to shut down such centres. Awdhesh Kumar, an official at an old age home in Nageshwar Colony, said: “Since we know that elderly people are more prone to get infected, we have submitted applications for getting the old age home shut for the time being.”

Meanwhile, social welfare department director Raj Kumar said the department has given funds to all District Child Protection Units (DCPU) in the state. “We are trying to provide all basic necessities to all shelter homes across the state. Funds for three months have been transferred to all DCPUs who look after shelter homes in every district. Moreover, we have decided to transfer funds for the next six months in the coming days. We are prepared to look after people at every shelter home during the crisis owing to Covid-19 pandemic,” he said.


