‘Tourism business in U’khand to take a massive hit if Covid-19 scare continues’
2020-03-21
Dehradun/Mussoorie/Pithoragarh/Uttarkashi/Nainital: The coronavirus outbreak and the restrictions put in place by the government to contain it by prohibiting entry of tourists — both foreign and domestic — into the state is all set to hit Uttarakhand hard as the state is primarily a tourism-oriented state. While welcoming the decision of state government to ban entry of tourists to stem the spread of infection, tourism industry stakeholders in most major destinations like Mussoorie, Nainital, Uttarkashi and Pithoragarh — said that they were gearing up for huge financial losses.

Ajay Bhargava, vice-president of Mussoorie Hotels Association, told TOI that “although tourist arrival would come to a standstill, the hoteliers would continue to incur expenditure on staff salaries, electricity and water bills and other overheads.” “It can break our backs. We see difficult times ahead,” he added.

Not just hoteliers, other stakeholders in the tourism industry like tour and taxi operators as well as shopkeepers, too, expressed concern on the financial implications of an extended lockdown.

“There are close to 1000 shops in Mussoorie and most of them are dependent upon tourism. Revenues of shopkeepers have dwindled drastically over the past fortnight and now a ban on entry of tourists would result in near zero revenues for us,” said Rajat Aggarwal, president of Mussoorie Traders Association.

While acknowledging that the tourism industry would be hit, state tourism minister Satpal Maharaj told TOI that “coronavirus is not just a regional or national issue but a global one and our priority is to save lives and ensure healthcare facilities are not stretched.” “Tourism revenue is not our focus at present,” he added.

Meanwhile, on Friday, soon after the state government banned entry of tourists in the state, the Nainital district administration announced to suspend boating and other adventure activities like paragliding and horse-riding in and around the lake town till March 31. 

All hotels have already been shut down in the town. “Almost all bookings have been cancelled and there is hardly any business prospect for the next month,” said Diwan Rautela, owner of a travel company.

While tourism professionals geared for loss in revenue and possible layoff of staff, some were hopeful that the situation will improve by the time the Char Dham Yatra season began in April. “We are hoping that the threat of this fatal virus will subside before the Char Dham Yatra begins in April. Tourists mainly visit in large numbers in the summer months. However, if the Covid-19 scare spills over and persists even till next month, then we will have a big problem at hand,” said Suresh Singh Negi, a hospitality professional in Rudraprayag.


