Tour operators face 80% cancellation for int’l destinations due to coronavirus scare
2020-03-07
Surat: In the last decade or so, Sagar Dandvate, a realtor, had not missed out a single year to enjoy summer holidays with his two daughters-Nupoor and Aarya-and wife Rashmi in Europe. “This is first time in a decade that we won’t be travelling to Europe due to COVID-19 scare. Even if you plan for other foreign destinations, it is risky and one can get infected with the deadly disease. My tour operator advised me not to take risk with the family as the virus is spreading very fast. However, we may plan our holidays in any of the destinations in North India during summer vacation.” 

The Dandvates are not the only one whose holiday plans have been put on back-burner in the wake of coronavirus outbreak. According to the estimates by tour operators in the Diamond City, more than 80% of the bookings to Far East countries and other destinations like Europe, the USA etc. have been cancelled after the news of outbreak of coronavirus surfaced. 

“The international tour business has come to a grinding halt in south Gujarat, including Surat. About 80% of the bookings to Far East countries during March and April have already been cancelled in the last few days due to outbreak of coronavirus. The cancellations are obvious and were expected by tour operators as nobody would want to risk their lives visiting the countries affected by deadly coronavirus disease,” says Minesh Naik, president of South Gujarat Tours and Travel Agents’ Association. 

Naik added, “It’s not only Far East countries, even Europe, UAE and the US have been affected due to coronavirus scare.” According to an estimate by tour operators, about 8,000 people from south Gujarat, including Surat, travel to Far East destinations, Europe and the US during summer vacation. 

Tour operators said they are getting inquiries for Bali, Maldives, South Africa, Mauritius and Sri Lanka due to cheaper airfare and hotels during summer vacation. However, they are closely assessing the developments in these countries and giving advice to customers accordingly.

“Some of the destinations like Bali, Maldives, South Africa, Mauritius and Sri Lanka are still open for travel and we are getting inquiries from travellers. We have dealt with 60% cancellation for Far East destinations, Europe and the US. The cancellations will increase in the coming days as travel advisories have been issued by respective governments,” said Atul Gupta, managing director of Shree Rani Sati Travel House. 

Ajay Jain, who owns an off-set printing factory in Bhestan, said, “I had my tickets booked for Europe for business and holiday tour for March 9, but now plan to visit Maldives instead. I am in regular touch with the tour operator to assess latest situation in Maldives.” 

Though international travel has come to a grinding halt, tour operators believe that domestic tourism will pick up in summer season. 

Manoj Patel, managing director of Hallmark Travels, told TOI, “Most of our clients travelling to international destinations have changed their holiday plans. They are making inquiries for domestic destinations, including Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim and North East.” 


