Tourist jumps quarantine, stopped in the nick of time
2020-03-16
Kochi: Cochin International Airport Limited (Cial) is on high alert after a UK national, who was tested Covid-19 positive, reached the airport from Munnar and tried to board a Dubai flight on Sunday morning. The 290-passenger Emirates flight (EK 531) was denied permission to take off due to intervention of district collector S Sushas around 15 minutes before the take-off until the 19-member tourist team from the UK was detained and all other passengers were health-screened after offloading them from the aircraft.

The flight later departed with 270 passengers at 12.47pm and Covid-19 positive man and his wife were shifted to the isolation ward of Ernakulam Medical College hospital. All the other 17 tourists were shifted to a private hotel in Kochi where they will be quarantined. Their blood samples have been taken for tests. Following this, the airport had to undergo a massive disinfection drive before operations were resumed and a high alert is on in the premises.

The UK native was in isolation in KTDC’s Tea County Resort in Munnar after he developed feverish symptoms on March 11. He left with others for Kochi on Saturday night.

As the couple did not board the flight and was apprehended right after security check, there was no direct contact with other passengers. Airport officials said CCTV footages were also checked and they did not find any direct contact with 270 passengers.

“There were 290 passengers scheduled on the flight, including the 19-member tourist team. All the 19 tourists have been detained and another passenger, a Keralite, who decided not to travel on the flight, was asked to stay in home quarantine. A massive disinfection drive has been initiated inside the terminals. All staff, including security officials who frisked them and had direct contact with the UK national, have been identified through CCTV footages and were asked to be under self-quarantine. The officials are taking measures to control the situation,” said agriculture minister V S Sunilkumar, who convened a review meeting at the airport.

The flight later departed with 270 passengers, who were screened for feverish symptoms at health counters. The runway was made available for departure of this delayed flight as there was no normal operation from 10am to 6pm due to the resurfacing work which will be completed only by March 28.

Agriculture minister V S Sunil Kumar, who is in charge of Ernakulam district’s Covid-19 control activities, conducted a review meeting at Cial with Ernakulam district collector S Suhas and said that there is no panic situation and no decisions have been taken to health-screen departing passengers too yet.

“The situation is totally under control and the airport operation will not be affected. The checking in arrival area will continue more efficiently. The aircraft, aerobridge, airport terminals have been disinfected. As of now, we have not taken any decision to check the health of passengers coming to the departure area in both sectors. Basically, these screenings are based on central government’s rules. The state government will discuss the matter whether departure passengers should be health-screened,” Kumar told media at the airport.

Meanwhile, a health official at Cial said that the screening of departing passengers needs to be implemented as the number of cases are increasing. “In case of an arriving passenger, who is found symptomatic, he will be directly taken to the hospital without allowing him to enter the terminal. As there is no check for departing passengers, an affected person can infect the entire terminal,” said the official.

The review meeting was attended by district police chief (Ernakulam rural) K Karthick, Cial managing director V J Kurien, airport director ACK Nair, senior health officials, CISF officials and other agencies at the airport.


