Coronavirus in Bihar: Tourism sector takes a beating
2020-03-16
PATNA: The global outbreak of coronavirus has adversely impacted footfall of international tourists in the state. Even top tourist destinations and UNESCO-declared world heritage sites in the state, such as Mahabodhi temple in Bodh Gaya and ruins of ancient Nalanda University, have witnessed a major decline in number of foreign as well as domestic tourists.

Suryaketu Das, an official at tourist information centre of BSTDC at Bodh Gaya, said, “Footfall of tourists has dropped by more than 40% tourists at Mahabodhi temple. The festive season at Bodh Gaya reaches its peak in January-February as a large number of Chinese pilgrims visit different monasteries and the Mahabodhi temple during this time of the year. However, pilgrims from China and other coronavirus-affected countries did not show up this time. Even though many international tourists from France, Germany, UK, Russia and USA visited the town in February, the number was much less when compared to previous years.”


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Das said round 280 Chinese tourists returned from the town in February. “Bodh Gaya, Rajgir and Nalanda, where tourists from Thailand, Hong Kong and Vietnam visit in large numbers, are bearing the brunt of coronavirus,” said Rajiv Kumar, an official at tourist information centre of BSTDC at Rajgir.

Travel and hospitality experts said more than 90% of international travellers have cancelled their hotel bookings in the last one month. Ajay Gupta, manager of a private hotel on Exhibition Road, said, “The government’s new norms to prevent spread of coronavirus have affected the travel and hospitality sectors. Business has taken a backseat at our hotel too.”

Arun Kumar Ojha, member of Bodh Gaya Hotelier Association, said, “Tourism sector has been badly affected following a drastic drop in footfall of international tourists. More than 90% of hotel bookings have been cancelled. Besides, many tourists from countries like Myanmar and Thailand, who were already present in Bodh Gaya, are leaving the town.”

Meanwhile, the Takhat Sri Harmandir Ji Patna Sahib and Bal Leela gurdwaras in Patna City, where thousands of devotees from across the country and abroad visit round the year, have also witnessed more than 50% fall in number of pilgrims.

“Devotees from New Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Canada and Singapore visit Takhat Sri Harmandir Ji Patna Sahib on a regular basis. Besides, more than 50,000 people from across the world visit the gurdwara during Holi every year. This year, foreign tourists hardly came and more than 50% of domestic tourists did not visit the gurdwara due to coronavirus threat,” said MS Dhillon, secretary of Takhat Sri Harmandir Ji Prabandhak Committee.


