Tourists from 5 nations to be allowed inside CTR only after they test negative for Covid-19
2020-03-14
Nainital: Officials of Corbett Tiger Reserve (CTR), on Friday, announced that tourists from five nations — China, Japan, South Korea, Iran and Italy — will only be allowed inside the reserves after they test negative for Coronavirus. The certification will be given by a medical team designated by the Chief Medical Officer (CMO).

This means that the tourists who come to visit CTR will have to wait until their medical report proves that they do not have coronavirus. “The testing of samples usually takes three-four days, so till that time tourists can stay the night at the hotels they have booked,” CTR director Rahul said, adding that this is for tourists from nations where Coronavirus cases have crossed alarming numbers. “Teams have been stationed at each gate of the tiger reserve and they will conduct blood test, nasal secretion tests, and thermal screenings of all tourists before granting them entry to CTR,” he said. These five countries are worst hit by Coronavirus and the number of cases in these nations runs into thousands.

Rahul said that even the tourists who come from places other than these priority nations will have to go through a thermal inspection before being allowed entry into the CTR. Indian tourists will also have to undergo these screenings.

The CTR officials say that face masks have been distributed to all its employees and they have been directed to wear them throughout their duty hours. "We have also procured sanitisers and disinfectants to maintain hygienic conditions. All of our employees have been distributed masks and they have been advised to wear them at all times," Rahul said.

Even though the tests are only for the tourists entering CTR, the administration has also asked the hotel and resort owners to keep an eye on tourists who show Coronavirus-like symptoms.

Hari Mann, president of Ramnagar Hotel Association, said that they have also procured sanitisers and disinfectants and are continuously checking on the tourists as well.


