Toy prices in Pune face a surge as coronavirus outbreak disrupts imports from China
2020-02-16
PUNE: The global coronavirus outbreak is playing havoc with the prices of plastic and electronic toys in the city. 


These toys are imported from China, the epicentre of the global health emergency, and the consequent supply disruption has resulted in a 40% spike prices, sources from the Toy Traders Association of Pune said. 

“There is a 50% shortage of these toys in Pune, and the prices have been on an upward spiral since December 1, 2019, ever since the market in China was shut in the wake of the outbreak,” a source said. 

India’s toy markets are dominated to the tune of nearly 70% by Chinese imports, including electronic cars, musical toys, dolls, kitchen sets, toys for toddlers and remote-controlled toys, among others. 

Sachin Kulkarni, who owns a toy store on Laxmi Road, said the cost of battery-operated stuffed toys has gone up from Rs790-800 to Rs1,000 in the past month. “The sudden surge in prices could also be attributed to the stringent changes in Union government’s Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) certification and the recent announcement of a hike in import duty on toys from 20% to 60%,” he said.

As per the recent notification issued by the Centre, imported toys will now need to be tested locally and must comply with BIS standards. “Non-compliant toys would have to be destroyed. Given the uncertainty regarding quality, many toy dealers have started to refrain from importing,” Kulkarni said.

He added the local market was in a panic. “We expect a further 20-30% hike in toy prices,” he added. “No new consignment has arrived from China since the outbreak,” Rahul Chheda, owner of Ambika Toys on Laxmi Road, said.

Bad news is in store for the furniture sector too. “Almost 35-40 % of the furniture is imported from China. Now supplies have stopped and rates are likely to increase by 30-40%. At present, dealers are just selling old stock,” Sachin Nivangune, president of Pune District Retail Traders’ Association, said.


