Karnataka: Traces of ‘dead’ virus stretch 28 patients’ hospital stay
2020-05-28
BENGALURU: Despite clear signs of recovery, 28 patients stayed in a Covid-19 hospital for up to four weeks as their test reports kept turning up positive. Experts now believe that traces of inactive virus in the body might have led to a false positive.

Barring the reports, there was nothing to suggest that the patients were still infected; they appeared healthy and eligible for discharge.

“I have heard that 28 patients at the Trauma Care Centre [on the campus of Victoria Hospital] stayed for over 25 days. It’s possible that the replica of RNA of the ‘dead’ virus reflected in these patients’ tests, leading to positive results,” said Dr CN Manjunath, nodal officer for labs and testing, Karnataka Covid-19 Task Force. RNA is short for ribonucleic acid. Coronavirus has RNA as its genetic material.

The 28 patients include a 50-year-old woman and her daughter-in-law, who completed their 28th day in hospital on Wednesday. The two continued to test positive even after 14 days, the period in which coronavirus cases generally recover.

Prolonged hospitalisation, especially in the isolation ward, can add to the stress and anxiety one may be experiencing after the diagnosis. “It’s difficult. Patients break down, get irritated and slide into depression as they see other people recover and go home,” Dr Manjunath said.

It is not clear how many of the said patients, excluding the two women, are still under observation at the Trauma Care Centre.

Two similar cases were seen at the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Chest Diseases. A 13-year-old girl and another patient tested positve on the 17th and 18th day of their hospital stay, respectively. The girl, who was asymptomatic, was Karnataka’s first Covid-19 case of lengthy hospitalisation. Later tests cleared her and she was discharged.

“There could be more such cases across the state, affecting the recovery rate. As per the government’s policy, a patient cannot be discharged unless they test negative,” said a doctor treating Covid-19 patients in Bengaluru.

Experts on a Covid-19 committee have suggested discharge of asymptomatic patients irrespective of the test results after seven days.

Earlier, tests on 14th day of hospital stay was the norm. Guidelines issued on Tuesday reduced this to seven days for asymptomatic patients and 10 days for symptomatic patients.

Dr V Ravi, a senior professor and member of the state Covid-19 expert committee, said the central government’s guidelines were clear that there was no need to test a patient if they showed no symptoms for three consecutive days. Such patients can be discharged. “It’s true that in many cases, the RNA of dead virus is leading to positive test results. The state government will comment on the testing and discharge policy soon,” Dr Ravi said.

A 20-year-old woman, who tested positive for Covid-19 on May 8 and delivered twins the next day, is still under observation at Trauma Care Centre as she continues to test positive for coronavirus. She is asymptomatic. Her husband, who was also diagnosed with Covid-19, has been discharged after testing negative.

