‘Track potential coronavirus carriers in Neemuch, Ratlam’
2020-03-24
Jaipur: The Bhilwara pandemic has gone beyond the border of Rajasthan as the medical department has alerted MP officials to track potential carriers of coronavirus in Neemuch and Ratlam. The screening team has found several patients from these two districts in MP who had visited the Bangar hospital in the last 15 days. The hospital is the epicentre of the coronavirus spread in the textile town with confirmed 13 Covid-19 cases, 38 in isolation in hospitals and 5392 suspected patients home quarantined all related to the hospital.“The hospital records has pointed out several patients from MP. The message has been communicated to the counterparts in MP to track down suspects. I am sure they have tracked several of them by now,” said Mushtaq Khan, Chief Medical Health Officer (CMHO), Bhilwara.Since the outbreak occurred in the textile town the city is under the curfew. The health department has made a list of 6500mostly patients who had visited the Bangar hospital or came in contact with the infected 13 persons since February 28. It begins one of the biggest exercise to track the suspected carriers. The MP officials have been provided with the name, contact details and address of the suspects. Till the last report came the MP officials have failed to confirm the tracking of even a single suspect...Back in the state, the spread in Bhilwara has left the health workers with the herculean task of tracking suspects in 8-10 districts of Rajasthan. Officials told that most of the suspect’s phone numbers are switched off or no response making it difficult to track them. The tracking of these suspects is being done by the health workers of the respective districts.“It is true that we have not able to track many suspects who are in the critical category due to unclear addresses, wrong village names and in many cases, the suspect has fled the village fearing being taken away by us,” said an official. Another worry for the city is to monitor the 5392 home isolation suspects which is probably the highest in any tier III city.