Tracking down Tablighi participants an arduous task
2020-04-02
Kozhikode: It will be an uphill task for the authorities to identify the Tablighi Jamaát workers who had attended various programmes held at the headquarters of the organisation at Nizamuddin in Delhi in March.

The state government has entrusted the intelligence wing of the police to track down the Tablighi workers after it was reported that many of those who attended the meetings have contracted Covid-19.

Police have thus far identified 52 people who had attended the All India Mashoora programme held at the Nizamuddin Markaz from March 7 to 10. Among them, 10 people are from Kannur, eight from Malappuram, six from Kottayam and five from Thiruvananthapuram. Some of them have returned to Kerala on March 11 by flight and the rest by trains.

Police have also identified another eight Malayalees who were at the Markaz on March 14 and 15. They were sent to Ethiopia and then to the Gulf for religious propagation by Tablighi authorities and returned to the Markaz on March 14.

The government has not received a comprehensive picture on the Malayalee participation in the programmes at Markaz. A conference was held for Tamil Nadu members in the third week of March but it is not known whether Malayalees too had participated in the meeting. Moreover, some Malayalees have moved to other states in India after taking part in the conferences at Markaz.

Tablighi workers contacted by the TOI said that one Dr Mukthar, the state Amir of the organisation, may have a correct picture of the Malayalee participation in the programmes. But Dr Mukthar was not available over the phone even after repeated attempts by the TOI.

Dr Sadiq, a worker of the Tablighi, said the organisation does not offer official memberships. “It is a spiritual movement for self-purification. Anyone can be a member and can leave at any point of time,” he said.

“Tablighi is an apolitical movement that doesn’t react to any social or political developments. A group of 10 to 12 persons is called a Jamaát, which will travel throughout the country for religious propagation,” he said.

The Markaz at Nizamuddin is a sort of control room for the activities of Tablighi in the country from where each Jamaát will get instructions. “They work mainly inside the Muslim community, especially among the so-called anti-socials with the aim of reforming them. Tablighi is almost like Sufism,” Dr Sadiq said.

“The mainstream society doesn’t know much about Tablighi Jamaát because the members don’t interact much with the society and are not concerned with worldly affairs,” he said.


