Trading in Byadagi chilli market poses threat to Covid-free district
2020-05-06
Haveri: Haveri district is in the green zone. The administration has strictly blocked border areas, restricting movement of vehicles and people. However, entry of trucks coming to Byadagi red chilli market to carry out trade is proving to be a threat, say locals, who have appealed to the authorities to strictly prohibit trade for some more days. 

Chilli growers and traders from Ballari, Gadag, Dharwad and other districts of Karnataka and also from Andhra Pradesh come to Byadagi to sell their produce in one of Asia’s biggest chilli markets. Since these places are either in red or orange zones, MLA Verupakshappa Ballari has requested the district administration to ban the entry of trucks from other places to Byadagi chilli market.

According to sources, a driver of one such trucks had home-quarantine stamp on his hand. Yet he was roaming freely in the chilli market. All social distancing norms are thrown to wind in the market, said sources, adding that the authorities have not been conducting health check-up for farmers, traders and drivers. 

This being the chilli season, trading is brisk on Mondays and Thursdays. Trucks enter Byadagi carrying thousands of tonnes of chillies. “I have requested the district administration to ban the entry of trucks from other districts and from outside the state,” said MLA Verupakshappa Ballari.

People allege that trading has been going on unabated despite a ban order deputy commissioner. “I have issued strict instructions to stop trading activities in Byadagi chilli market. However, if trading is going on despite ban orders, I will look into it. Meanwhile, labourers are engaged in removing chilli stalks and the activity is going on smoothly. The workers are following social distancing norms. We are taking every measure to ensure Haveri district continues to be in the green zone,” clarified deputy commissioner Krishna Bajpai.

Shivanand Mallanagoudar, commission agent in the Byadagi chilli market, said that all agents and buyers and have been informed not to bring chilli to the Byadagi market till the lockdown is lifted. 

CAPTION

Workers at the Byadagi chilli market adopt safety measures like the use of hand santisers and social distancing 


