Covid-19: Traders’ outfits extend support to Janata Curfew in Madurai
2020-03-22
MADURAI: Various trade organisations in Madurai and southern districts who have offered to extend their support to Prime Minister’s call for people’s curfew on March 22, have sought relief from the government. 

President of the Tamil Nadu Chamber of Commerce and Industry, N Jegatheesan has said that the chamber fully endorses the clarion call and would extend their support to the all-out initiatives taken by the central and various state governments to contain the spread of deadly virus Covid-19 in our country.

But, the decelerating take off of many goods including essential food items and medicines have taken a heavy toll on the financial health of the business community especially in the MSME sector, he said. 

Various countries like UK and France has offered incentives and tax reliefs for businesses and have postponed payment of tax. Most of the MSMEs in our country have been keeping large tax paid on inventory. Steep fall in sales turnover with a sizeable portion on credit basis due to lack of demand has created a severe dent in the cash flow of the units in the MSME sector, resulting in their inability to make GST payments on time.

He added that, the central government should postpone the tax payment due to be remitted by the taxpayers in the MSME sector with less than Rs10 crore annual turnover, for the months of March, April and May 2020 to July 20th 2020. They may be permitted to file GSTR 3B returns every month without payment of tax till such time. 

Collection of loan repayment, interest and penalties payable by them for the year 2018-19 may be suspended till coranovirus threat withers away. Instalments and interest payable by such units on short term and long term bank loans may also be kept in abeyance at least for six months or such loan schemes may be rescheduled, he said.

President of the Madurai District Tiny and Small Scale Industries Association (Maditssia), B Muruganantham has also said that they would extend full cooperation to Prime Minister’s move to control the pandemic. The Tamil Nadu Fireworks and Amorces Association (TANFARMA) have also extended its support.

