Traditional art forms and peppy folk songs unite to fight coronavirus in Hyderabad
2020-04-06
HYDERABAD: Though the empty streets might make many sad, locals are keeping the spirits high through traditional art forms Oggu Katha and Harikatha and folk songs to fight Covid-19. The ‘village crier’ with his ‘dappu’ is regularly making announcements on every street to spread awareness on social distancing and handwashing. Recorded messages are also being spread through ancient art forms.


Oggu Katha is a story-telling art form involving a group of people. Ustad Ravi, who is pursuing a Ph.D course from Telugu University, has recorded an Oggu Katha episode explaining the steps that need to be taken to prevent the ‘dangerous’virus from spreading.

Moreover, a few well-known folk artistes in various parts of the state are writing their own scripts and using the language and phrases that are used in those areas to spread the message across. In Rajanna-Sircilla district, an Oggu Katha group led by Diva of Mandepalli village in Thangapalli mandal is educating the people about coronavirus and explaining to them what one needs to do to prevent it from spreading. The group recently received praise from Union minister of state for home G Kishan Reddy for its efforts. “It is a wonderful effort by Oggu Katha artistes to spread awareness among people,” he said. 

Similarly, another group, Seenanna, is also making efforts to drive home the message on coronavirus. “Police are doing their job with their lathis to see that people don’t roam around unnecessarily,” the group said. 

“Eat whatever you have at home and stay home. Wash your hands. Use a mask and a handkerchief. Take precautions during this time,” go the lyrics of their song, which also mentions how it spread from China.

 Department of culture director Mamidi Harikrishna, recorded several folk songs on coronavirus sung by folk artistes. Another popular art form, Harikatha, is also being used to drive home the message. Further, a programme has been recorded with artiste Padmalaya Acharya to spread awareness on the virus. Harikrishna, who also began an initiative with poets, said 340 poems were uploaded on Youtube in seven days on the channel ‘Return Gift 2 Corona’.


