Traders resolve to follow Covid rules to avoid further biz loss
2020-06-12
KOLKATA: The closure of two blocks at New Market after a trader tested positive has triggered panic among other market committees in the city, forcing them to take note of how flouting social distancing norms can adversely impact their businesses. A major portion of the College Street market was also declared a containment zone on Wednesday and shut down after a trader tested positive. 

Members of many committees held meetings on Thursday to figure out ways to control the surging crowds, ensure everybody wears masks and implement social distancing. Officers from Burrabazar and Posta police stations visited various wholesale and retail markets and held meetings with traders to devise a plan to conduct business in a safe environment. Many business chambers reminded their members to be cautious or be prepared to suffer losses in the near future. 

Detection of Covid-19 positive cases in any market or commercial establishment may lead to partial or complete closure of the place for two to three weeks. 

“The events at New Market and College Street Market and their consequences should be an eye-opener for the entire trading community. Even slight negligence or mistake can result in complete closure of business for several weeks. None of us would want such a thing to happen. We have again communicated to all our members to maintain social distancing norms inside the markets and not allow anybody without wearing masks,” said Tarak Nath Trivedi, general secretary of the Federation of Traders’ Organisation of West Bengal and Entally Market Traders’ Welfare Association. 

Initially, the KMC authorities had decided to close the entire New Market but reversed their decision later in the day and sealed off only two blocks. “For the time being, the rest of the market will reopen but 50 odd shop owners will have to wait till their portion can be reopened. This will ruin their businesses,” said a shopkeeper in New Market.

“Currently, shops are opening for only few hours and the business is nowhere close to where it was before the lockdown, but we are seeing unprecedented crowds in the markets with several people flouting the guidelines. The business community needs to decide on their own future. If we don’t follow the norms to prevent the virus spread, we run the risk of losing our businesses,” said Mahendra Jain, secretary of the Chamber of Textile Trade and Industry. 

Many market committees said they will be reverting to the arrangements during the lockdown with separate entry and exit gates along with guards to check if everybody was wearing masks or not.


