Traders brace for losses as public places remain shut due to COVID-19 scare
2020-03-16
Dehradun: A day after Uttarakhand government declared coronavirus an epidemic in the state and ordered the shut down of colleges and cinema halls, the business community has expressed concern over the losses they are facing and will face due to a dip in the footfall at public spaces.

On Sunday, the historic Jhanda Mela celebrations at Darbar Sahib, which usually last for a month, had to be concluded on the third day itself after Mahant Devendra Das, head of Darbar Sahib, in his address, told the visitors that celebrations are being called off early, in the interest of the people. The visitors had come from different states and even from across the border. 

Once the people started vacating Darbar Sahib, the shops outside were also closed down. Hotel owners in the city meanwhile claimed that though coronavirus was declared an epidemic on Saturday (March 14), the tourism business has been suffering for almost 15 days now. 

The number of bookings, they alleged, had been shrinking day by day and events were being rapidlycancelled as people were avoiding coming for large gatherings.

Hotelier SP Kochar, who is also the president of Doon Valley Hotels and Restaurants Association, told TOI, “The losses that we have incurred due to the coronavirus scare are beyond imagination. State government should ensure that people are taking all preventive measures but also ensure that a panic situation isn’t created.” 

He further said that the losses are such that business owners fear that they won’t have enough money for daily operational costs and even for paying monthly salaries to their employees. “Many families depend on the hospitality business in our state. We must get past this panic situation soon,” added Kochar. Amit Sharma, general manager of a city-based hotel, told TOI, “The scare is such that several private event bookings and government programmes have been cancelled. The last minute cancellations are denting our business. We just hope that the situation improves soon.”

Besides prominent hotels, caterers are also bearing the brunt as several orders have been cancelled in the last one week. Suresh Gupta, a caterer, told TOI, “We had orders for events at prominent schools and private gatherings. Majority of them have been cancelled now due to the coronavirus epidemic.” 

Meanwhile, retail shopkeepers at Paltan Bazaar said they are keeping a watch on the situation. 

Pankaj Masson, president of Doon Valley Mahanagar Udyog Vyapar Mandal, told TOI, “We are ensuring cleanliness in the market area and shopkeepers and other staff members are wearing masks at all times in the wake of the coronavirus threat. We are trying to ensure that the threat of the disease doesn’t affect us adversely.” 

(With inputs from Shivani Azad)


