Traffic jams in Dehradun, Nainital despite lockdown, several booked
2020-03-24
DEHRADUN/ NAINITAL: A day after the state government issued orders of statewide lockdown of non-essential services, many residents in Dehradun were seen in large numbers on the roads causing traffic jams at some places – even as cops kept on persuading them to stay at home in view of the Covid-19 outbreak.


A large number of people in cars and two-wheelers were seen near the Clock Tower, one of the busiest intersections of the city, on Monday morning. While several residents said that there was a panic-like situation and they had come out to get necessary items. Some were seen arguing with police personnel.

Taking action, Dehradun police arrested 23 individuals and registered cases against 112 people for violating the order of statewide lockdown of non-essential services issued by the state government on Sunday.

Senior superintendent of police (SSP) of Dehradun, Arun Mohan Joshi, said, “At least 23 people were arrested in 13 separate incidents under section 151 of CrPC for violating the order, while cases have been registered against 112 people under section 188 of IPC. Besides, 53 vehicles were seized and 194 have been challaned by the police.”

“The order issued on Sunday read that people can go out to buy essential items such as groceries, vegetables and milk. Moreover, employees of essential services were kept out from the ambit of the order. However, anyone still found on the road without a valid reason will be dealt with strictly under the relevant sections,” Joshi said.

CM Trivendra Rawat, meanwhile, asked officials to strictly enforce the lockdown. In a message on Monday, the chief minister said that the lockdown has been put into force for the safety of people and urged residents to cooperate with authorities and remain in their homes till March 31.

When contacted, Ashok Kumar, director general (DG) law and order, told TOI, “On Monday, we observed that some people were complacent in their approach towards the lockdown order. However, police are going to strictly enforce the order from Tuesday onwards and all unnecessary movements would be restricted.”

Despite the imposition of section 144, there were similar scenes of heavy traffic in Nainital district on Monday. The situation in other towns of Kumaon like Kichha, Rudrapur and Kashipur in Udham Singh Nagar, Almora as well as Bageshwar was also the same.

Speaking to TOI, several locals said that there was a panic-like situation and they had to step out of their houses to buy necessary goods.

The administration in Nainital also announced that it will suspend functioning of stone crushers in the district till the lockdown is lifted. The administration ordered the owners of stone crushers to not let the workers leave their homes unless the state’s border is reopened. While the Udham Singh Nagar district administration has said that it will make sure that even the grocery stores in the district remains open during the three-hour window of 10 am and 1 pm.


