Trains to follow isolation norms even after lockdown
2020-04-28
JAIPUR: Even after the lockdown is lifted, railway stations and trains will have to follow certain guidelines to maintain social distancing at least for 90 days to start with. Sources said the North Western Railway (NWR) was awaiting for final directions from the railway board.

Authorities said many new practices including no issue of waitlisted tickets, hiked prices of platform tickets, no allotment of middle berths and things like thermal screening and sanitising are likely to be introduced.

According to sources, the railway board has been taking suggestions from various zones and its officers to know what measures can be put in place to ensure social distancing even after lockdown is over. 

NWR sources said even after lockdown, railways will follow a protocol to ensure no overcrowding and social distancing.

Rajasthan has two railway zones — West Central Railway (covering Kota, Bharatpur, Jhalawar and Baran) and NWR (covering other districts) — where officers have not ruled out possibility of restrictions by Indian railways.

“There is a possibility that no waiting list tickets will be allotted to ensure there is no spilling over of passengers inside train. Also, there could be provision that no middle berth would be allotted. Also, platform ticket prices would be increased to an extent that people will avoid walking into railway just like that. The number of halt stations for various trains will also be curtailed,” said a senior officer of NWR.

Officers of NWR said they were not aware of any such developments so far. “Let’s wait for the directions from the rail ministry before commenting on it. As of now, we are supposed to be under lockdown where there is no movement of passengers trains,” said an officer.

However, officers did not rule out that things like use of sanitizers, disinfectants and thermal screening to be in practice for at least 90 days after the lockdown is withdrawn.

Passenger services were halted on March 25 when a 21-day countrywide lockdown came into effect to prevent the spread of coronavirus. 


