Transport corporations lose Rs 1,200cr during lockdown
2020-05-12
Chennai: Tough days are ahead for government-run transport corporations in Tamil Nadu as they have faced an estimated revenue loss of Rs 1,200 crore in the lockdown so far. Given the loan burden and pending dues, the state transport department has planned to increase borrowings, say officials.

According to official data, around 1.6 crore people commute in 21,500 government buses managed by different transport corporations, including Metropolitan Transport Corporation (MTC) in Chennai. The corporations earn about Rs 25 crore through ticket sales a day, which is a major source of revenue.

Of the total earnings, nearly 53% (Rs 340 crore per month) goes into paying salaries for employees and monthly pensions for retired staff. “At present, we are managing salary commitments mostly through government reimbursements through students’ subsidy schemes,” said a senior transport department official.

Transport unions, however, complain that the government is yet to clear pending terminal benefits (provident fund, gratuity, etc.,) of 3,520 employees who retired last year. This would roughly cost Rs 920 crore.

“Though proceedings were initiated and budgetary allocations were made, not a single penny has reached retired employees,” said S Sampath from Tamil Nadu State Transport Staff Federation, Madurai.

Another burden faced by corporations is pending road accident settlement dues. On an average, at least 1,000 people die a year in accidents involving government buses. These cases, along with injury cases, will be heard at motor vehicle accident tribunals and on several occasions, hundreds of buses were seized for non-payment of compensations ordered.

“Unlike TNSTC Villupuram or Madurai, MTC used to settle compensations soon. But recently, MTC too is also delaying it. Advocates might hesitate to take up such cases in the future as clients will not understand the situation and will blame us,” said advocate V S Suresh Kumar, who handles accident claims.

The situation may not get better soon as even after lockdown ends, bus services will not operate at full capacity initially. Buses can operated with up to 50% seating capacity, which means half the revenue.

“In the coming months, we might increase our borrowings through government guarantees,” the transport department official said.

Sampath added that the department can also seek for Motor Vehicle (MV) tax exemptions during this lockdown phase as it will reduce spending by 2%. 


