Bengaluru: Transgender community faces a tough time during lockdown
2020-05-05
BENGALURU: With lockdown restrictions in place and social distancing a must, members of the transgender community are finding their source of livelihood severely hit. 

Mostly dependent on begging at traffic signals, on trains and crowded public places like markets, transgenders are now staring at an uncertain future. With no economic resources to support themselves, community members fear running out of supplies and money soon.

A few NGOs have extended financial support to the transgenders, many of who suffer from serious ailmets, to buy rations and medicines. 

In Bengaluru, a large number of transgenders stay in places like Dasarahalli, Hebbal, Magadi Road, Amruthahalli, Bapuji Nagar, Vijayanagar, Bommanahalli, Hosa Road and Kamakshipalya. 

“We are facing a big crisis since our livelihood has been affected due to Covid-19. There is no source of income. Some NGOs have distributed kits, which would last only for a few weeks. The government should provide us food kits for at least two-three months,” said Soumya, a transgender.

Rajesh Umadevi Srinivas of Sangama, an NGO working for human rights of sexual minorities, said: “The condition of transgender community has turned from bad to worse after Covid-19. Many are struggling to pay their monthly rents and buy medicines.”

“Their future looks bleak even after the lockdown is lifted. We have distributed 3,404 ration kits to transgender community members in other districts. We should now start thinking about how they are going to survive after the lockdown and an action plan should be formulated,” Rajesh added.

Veena S, a transgender, said: “Many house owners are threatening us that we should vacate if we can’t pay rent. Our community is the most affected due to Covid-19, but there has been not enough support from the government so far.”

A spokesperson from the Archdiocese of Bangalore said they have distributed 300 food kits in Magadi Road for transgender community members.


