Trapped between hunger & virus: Plight of ‘dhobis’
2020-04-10
JAIPUR: A nicely pressed, non-wrinkled trouser always gives you a sharp, put together look. And the credit goes to the ‘iron men’. 

Rajesh Verma of Bapu Nagar is one of them. The non-descript person has a unique knack to iron any kind of dress material irrespective of fabric to make his customers satisfied. And he makes it a habit to lift the iron, moves up a bit and does it again on the same spot like an experienced conductor of the Philharmonic Orchestra. From morning till the evening, he used to iron hundreds of clothes.

But things took a turn for worse since the countrywide lockdown was implemented from March 24. He said the situation is much worrying than demonetisation, which only delayed payments and did not damage the business. Like him, there a few more others who eke out a living by depending solely on the business are in distress now.

“Yes, we are aware that all the offices are shut in the midst of crisis. And we also know that there would be less workload. The lockdown imposes a bigger burden on social security system and we are the worst sufferers. The situation is aggravating with each passing day and it will be annoying if the government doesn’t step in,” said Rajesh with moist eyes.

The 21-day lockdown by Prime Minister Narendra Modi to contain the spread of Covid-19 has him worried. “I don’t have enough money to support my family for a long period. I will have to look for an alternative, or borrow money from friends. When every state government is making efforts to provide food to homeless and underprivileged people, why not us, who depend on daily wages?

Taking a dig at the government policy, he said, “When the food vendors are not barred from operating, then why we have to shut down our operations? Some of the vendors operate without passes. But we have to follow all restrictions. When the government is taking all measures to help entrepreneurs affected by the crisis, why do they turn a blind eye to us? If virus won’t kill us, hunger will.” 


