Travel, tourism sectors stare at uncertain future post Covid-19
2020-04-17
VISAKHAPATNAM: With the travel and tourism industry under stress due to the Covid-19 pandemic, more than 1,500 travel agents from the two Telugu states have urged the government for bailout packages. The industry is also staring at a possible job loss of around 60% of workforce in AP and Telangana.


“Ours is the only industry which starts earning from the first month of the calendar year. However, the outbreak of Covid-19 crippled our business right from mid-January. In February and March, there were only cancellations and no fresh bookings as the country went into lockdown. There is no hope of revival in the coming months,” said K Vijay Mohan, president of Tours & Travel Operators Association of AP.



The association has 300 members operating in AP alone besides another 300-odd individual agents. “Our members are facing at least Rs 10 crore loss every month, while the loss for non-members would be around Rs 6 crore. This has been the situation since January,” Mohan added. 

Usually, 75% of the business in the travel and tourism sector happens between January and August, with 40% in the summer months alone. “We don’t earn much in the first quarter, but business picks up as summer approaches. Our profits are mainly from international travel, not domestic ones,” said Srinivasa Rao, a travel agent. He added that a travel operator or agent can earn around Rs 40 lakh during the summer months when many people travel abroad to spend their holidays.

However, due to the Covid threat, people are unlikely to make any travel or holiday plans in the near future. “It’s normally a lean season for us from August to December. How will we sustain ourselves, unless the government bails us out,” says a tour operator, adding that there would be lay-offs in the coming days. 

“There has been no business for the past four months. The maintenance cost of my offices in AP is Rs 14 lakh every month. But I earned only Rs 4 lakh. I can’t even pay salaries to my staff, forget paying for maintenance,” rues Mohan.

He added that many people would be wary of taking flights for a few months even after the situation improves. “If the travel time is between four to seven hours, people will prefer to go by road and in their own cars instead of taking public transport,” he said.


