Treat your pets like family during lockdown, say experts
2020-03-26
Pet parents in Tamil Nadu are in a fix. With misinformation doing the rounds that pet animals can spread COVID-19, animal lovers are perturbed. Adding fuel to the fire was the report that two dogs had tested positive for Coronavirus in Hong Kong. In India, the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) in Maharashtra and other civic bodies had put up hoardings asking people to stay away from pets as a precautionary measure. All this led to people abandoning their furry friends. Though health officials have stated that there is no evidence of animal to human transmission of the virus, it seems some people are not in a mood to listen.

Humane Animal Society, an animal welfare organisation in Coimbatore, has been flooded with calls asking them to take their pets in the shelter. “We have got a number of calls, but we are trying to educate people that the disease doesn’t spread from animals. This is the time for social distancing from people not animals,” says Mini Vasudevan, founder of the organisation.

Michael Abraham of CSK Pet Point, Mylapore, in Chennai, says that he, too, received calls from people asking him to help find a shelter for their pets. “These are people who are going back to their home town from Chennai following the lockdown,” he says.


Animal lovers bear the brunt“My owner has asked me to move out of the house,” laments Anusha R (name changed), who recently moved to Delhi from Coimbatore. “The only reason being that I have a dog. I tried to explain to her that dogs cannot spread the virus, but in vain.” R Kannan from Gomathipuram in Madurai, on the other hand, has been missing his morning jog with his dog, Veenu. “It’s tough to keep her inside the house. She looks dull. We both need a break.”


There’s good news, tooHowever, Reshmi Anil Giri, a resident of Prince Highlands, Iyyappanthangal, says that she is glad her gated community is understanding of pets. “Before moving here, the first thing I checked was whether they allowed pets or not. The residents in the apartment are friendly with pets, but I stopped taking her out, to be on the safer side,” she says. 


Pets don’t spread CoronavirusAsk Dr Chinny Krishna, co-founder of Blue Cross of India, about the concerns among pet owners and he says, “Organisations like The World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) have sent notifications saying that pets don’t spread Coronavirus."

There is no cross-transmission, says another veterinarian. “Only Section 144 has been imposed. You can take your dog out and go for a walk. Just ensure that you take all the precautionary measures while you do that,” he adds.

Dr G Venu Gobal, veterinary surgeon at JSR pet multi-speciality hospital, Coimbatore, says that pet owners need not panic. “All you need to do for the next 10-15 days is to restrict the movement of dogs outside the house. If you step out, you will be at risk of contracting the virus. It’s advisable to avoid food from outside as well and instead, feed them homemade food.”
 

No clarity on whether pet shops should be open or notPet store owner Michael Abraham feels that pet shops should be open during lockdown. “If pet shops are closed, many animals will suffer. My shop is located in Mylapore and I have regular customers, who buy food for stray dogs during their morning walk and feed them. This will completely stop and the dogs would go hungry,” he says. 

Agreeing with him is another pet store owner in Anna Nagar. “We still have no clarity on whether the shops should be open or not. We have to get clarity from the Pet Shops Association. We have birds and small animals inside the store and we are really worried about them,” he says.
When quizzed if there has been an increase in sales after the announcement of lockdown, Michael says, “We received many calls for kitten food. As far as dogs are concerned, you need not worry as you can feed them most of the human food.”


Ensure to take precautionary measures, say expertsDr Chinny Krishna asks pet lovers to take precautionary measures. “Wash the paws of dogs after you come back home from their walk. Social distancing is applicable to pets as well. Ensure that they do not come in close contact with other animals or people when taken outside.” Mini Vasudevan adds, “This is the time to be there for the animals. All you need to do is practise basic hygiene and not allow them near an unknown person.”


Advisory from Animal Welfare Board of IndiaA large number of pet shops or animal breeding facility where animals and birds are kept for sale are now shut down due to lockdown/curfew. The animals stranded in such places are likely to suffer and die without food, water and temperature control. All such pet shops are to be evacuated by the State Animal Welfare Boards through SPCAs (Society for the Prevention of Cruelty Against Animals). It is requested to kindly issue necessary directions to all district authorities to check the pet shops in the locality for searching of animals, if any and evacuate them.




