Lockdown heroes: Treating a critical patient boosts morale of Bharati hospital doctor
2020-04-04
PUNE: The high of successfully treating the very critical 41-year-old woman, who had tested positive for Covid-19, has come as a massive fillip to the staff of Bharati Vidyapeeth (DTU) Medical College.

For 12 days, the woman was on ventilator due to acute respiratory distress, and leading the charge against the contagion was Dr Shivakumar S Iyer, professor, department of critical care medicine.

When the woman was finally taken off the ventilator and showed improvement, it made the staff — doctors, intensivists, ICU nurses and healthcare attendants, drawing from the critical care department — forget about their own personal struggles in those dozen days. “All our staff managing this case had to be quarantined and stayed away from their family during this period. Many have young children or elderly parents,” he said.

When the woman was admitted to the hospital, she was immediately placed in isolation. “The most difficult part was managing the fear and panic in the minds of relatives and also health care personnel,” Iyer recalled. 

Over the next 12 days, the woman needed close and careful attention by the team attending to her. “The main challenge was to provide care without endangering our staff. My major role apart from providing expert care was allaying the anxiety and providing emotional support to the family and staff,” Iyer said.

When she finally got off the ventilator, Iyer recalled, it boosted their morale.“This condition has a very high mortality. It has helped gear us to manage subsequent cases with confidence,” said Iyer.

Iyer said that managing just this one case took a lot out of everyone. “I shudder to think what will happen if we are flooded with cases. It will overwhelm our health system and endanger our staff and secondarily, all of society. Providing adequate resources to healthcare personnel and keeping up their spirits, will be a challenge,” said Iyer.


