Covid-19: Treatment for Hyderabad boy with Chapel syndrome hits roadblock
2020-03-19
HYDERABAD: An eight-year-old boy from the city, the only known case of the rare Chapel Syndrome in India, was to travel to US to participate in a clinical trial for a drug being tested by the National Institute of Health (NIH), but with travel restrictions owing to Covid-19, his treatment has hit a roadblock. 



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


Chapel syndrome which is a genetic disease in which the CD 55 gene is missing in patients, meanwhile causes an extreme shortage of protein in the body. Patients also continue to lose protein through stools and have life threatening complications.

Condition of the boy, Ayan, has worsened in the last few weeks and doctors are waiting for his health to stabilise.

The doctor treating him has written to the institute to allow treating him in Hyderabad by supplying the drug locally. “With restrictions imposed due to Covid-19, the process has run into delays. The US-based institute is now trying to arrange for a health insurance of the patient as well as his family members, as travelling during the ongoing pandemic can expose them to the virus and they might require hospitalisation. While these things are taking time, Ayan’s condition has deteriorated. We have sought permission from the institute to allow us to carry out research here by enrolling our centre in the trial group and we will share the results with them,” said Dr Prashanth Bachina, paediatric gastroenterologist.

For that to happen, an approval from the Drugs Approval Committee of India and permission from Drug Controller General of India is needed. 

Meanwhile, Ayan is on a daily dose of injections for hypoalbuminia and it is being administered 2-3 times a week. “We are told that it will take at least three months before he is stable and can be sent for further treatment. Since his treatment is not available here, doctors at AIIMS had contacted many institutes. While researchers from Turkey and Bangkok had initially wanted to take him as a research subject, but they later refused. Now our only hope is the US institute. We have exhausted all our monetary reserves and the little which came from crowd-funding. Each day is a challenge for us now,” said Ayan’s father Md Tajuddin, who is a postman.

While Rs 2 lakh raised through crowd-funding sustained his treatment for a few months, the family is banking on crowd-funding once again for his treatment in Hyderabad till he is stable enough to be sent to US or approved for clinical trial in India. The estimated expense is between Rs 1.2 crore to Rs 6 crore depending on the response to the drug.

