Tribal communities being sensitised about Covid-19 through online tutorials
2020-04-17
Dehradun: Several tribal communities of Uttarakhand have been affected due to the lockdown which has been imposed in the country. In particular, tribe members claim that certain sections of their communities are not properly aware about Covid-19 while few also claim that their traditional businesses have taken a hit. In order to spread awareness about the disease, government agencies like Tribal Cooperative Marketing Development Federation of India (TRIFED) have started online tutorials with the help of self-help groups to sensitise members of these communities. 

Speaking to TOI, Bir Singh, who belongs to the Jaunsari tribal community, which is spread across the Chakrata region of Garhwal, said that “there are many people among our 365 tribal villages, especially those who are in the interiors, who are still not taking the epidemic seriously.” “Many of them are not exposed to as much information regarding the epidemic as we are. The online workshops being organised by the government are helping many members get more information,” he added. 

Neelam Rana, a member of the Tharu tribe, which is spread across Khatima and Sitarganj towns of Udham Singh Nagar district, told TOI that there is lack of awareness in her community too.

“Everybody knows about Covid-19 but still there are some people who are not giving much importance to social distancing and other essential norms,” said Rana.

Ramesh Pangtey, a member of the Bhotiya tribal community of Pithoragarh, also echoed similar views.

Members of the tribal communities further said that their businesses have taken a significant hit due to the lockdown.

“Our Jaunsari community is traditionally involved in the business of manufacturing woollen clothes. We begin preparations for the next season during this time but amidst the lockdown, it is getting difficult to procure raw material,” said Bir Singh.

Neelam Rana, too, added that the lockdown had affected their traditional business of making items like tea coaster, table mats, baskets and flower pots from Moonj grass

Meanwhile, TRIFED, which is an organisation under the ministry of tribal affairs, is focusing on digital tutorials in which besides self-help groups, local artisans are also involved. The agency has also taken steps for the economic welfare of the tribal community.

“We are providing online workshops with the help of UNICEF and WHO to tribal communities across the country. Our focus is to make sure that the even the tribal communities living in the most interior parts of the country know the importance of social distancing and washing their hands with soap. Also, we have asked various tribes to make three-layered face masks since there is a big demand for them. Later, we will be supplying these face masks to government bodies and in this way, it will help supplement the income of these communities too,” said Altaf Ansari, regional manager of TRIFED. 


