Trichy shops ignore lockdown norms post relaxations
2020-06-03
Trichy: The precautionary measures pursued by the shops during the lockdown are getting diluted after the announcement of relaxations despite people in more numbers stepping out, say residents. A majority of the commercial establishments fail to provide hand sanitizers or hand wash facility for their customers. Social distancing that was ensured until a few weeks ago to prevent Covid-19 spread is completely ignored now.A month ago, commercial establishments that were permitted to do business in Trichy were cautious to restrict their customers. Markings were made to manage the crowd. As days progressed with relaxations, these measures went for a toss. Tea shops that were supposed to sell only parcels continue to allow customers to dine there, which had led to formation of active crowds near tea stalls. “Two weeks ago, shops had established ropes to restrict customers near the billing desk. Those arrangements are absent now, even customers were not given hand sanitizers,” T Senthilkumar, a resident of Palakkarai said. Only a section of medical shops, bakeries and outlets selling kids gears were spotted following the precautionary measures to ward off Covid-19.Hardware shops and automobile spare parts shops in various parts of the city were seen flouting social distancing among customers. People have started venturing out without facemasks and the number is increasing in commercial streets. Sanitizers are still missing at bank ATMs.“We will impose fines on shops that flout the safety norms. Recently, we penalised shops that were ignoring social distancing, and the enforcement will continue,” an official with Trichy Corporation said. With positive cases being reported in Trichy city for the past three days, the corporation received criticism from local people for being inactive against the lapses. Acknowledging this, a section of civic body employees joined a team comprising revenue, and police to raid shops for ensuring public hygiene.