Trichy Corpn not providing updates on Covid-19 in city
2020-06-13
Trichy: Although Covid-19 cases in Trichy city has increased by 74% in the last three weeks, the reluctance of Trichy Corporation in disclosing city specific Covid-19 statistics is keep residents in dark.

As neither the public relations office (PRO) nor the social media handles of Trichy Corporation shares the authentic Covid-19 updates such as source of infection and location of positive cases, misinformation is a cause of worry for city folks, especially family members of aged residents in Trichy.

Since the city witnessed the first batch of Covid-19 positive cases in the first week of April, there is constant hesitation from the Corporation to provide updates. While other urban local bodies share Covid-19 statistics through social media platforms, Trichy Corporation’s social media handles have been in deep slumber for months now.

With the total number of Covid-19 positive cases reported in Trichy city increased from 35 (on May 25) to 61 (on June 10) and more cases being reported on a daily basis, rumours are doing rounds in social media platforms as information is concealed by Trichy Corporation. 

“The local body should maintain a tracker of Covid-19 cases online and areas reported so that people will be cautious and aware of the places where not to venture,” said K P Rangaprasad, joint secretary, Satta Panchayath Iyakkam. 

Earlier, the formation of containment zones helped residents to identify vulnerable areas. As per new rules, containment zones will be established only if there are five or more positive cases. The information on new positive cases is also not being shared by the civic body. “Trichy Corporation can share a bulletin every evening mentioning the city-specific Covid-19 cases,” said M Sekaran, president, Federation of Consumer and Service Organisations.

NRI family members of senior citizens staying alone in Trichy usually seek updates on social media handles of Trichy Corporation. The PRO for Trichy Corporation has been vacant for over four years now. “Daily state-wide Covid-19 bulletin being shared should suffice. Without the permission of district administration, we cannot share city-specific data,” a senior health official with Trichy Corporation said.


