Trichy reports first Covid-19 death; 85 test +ve in South TN
2020-06-03
Madurai/Trichy: Trichy recorded its first Covid-19 casualty as a 74-year-old woman died at Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Government Hospital (MGMGH) on Tuesday. The central region of the state recorded 17 new positive cases pushing the total positive cases to 923.

Meanwhile, 85 Covid-19 cases were reported in south Tamil Nadu on Tuesday, of which 51 cases were in Tuticorin district. The total cases in the ten southern districts have climbed to 1,586.

The woman, a resident of Alwar Thoppu in Trichy city corporation area, passed away at the intensive medical care unit (IMCU) in the isolation ward at MGMGH around 10 am. Hospital sources said that the woman had comorbid conditions of diabetes and hypertension. She was admitted to the hospital with severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) on May 27. The woman tested positive to Covid-19 on May 28, following which she was shifted to the IMCU. The source of her infection could not be ascertained so far.

In the south, for the first time in two months, at least one Covid-19 case was reported in each of the 10 districts in a single day. Tuticorin saw the most number of patients on Tuesday with 31 local cases and 20 imported cases. 

As many as 33 cases in the southern districts were imported cases from other states. The total cases in Tirunelveli went up to 366 after 12 more cases were recorded on Tuesday. Theni district reported five local cases, while Kanyakumari reported six local cases and one imported case. Dindigul reported two local cases whereas Virudhunagar reported three. Tenkasi, Madurai and Ramanathapuram all reported one local case each. In addition, Tenkasi district recorded an imported case as well.

Meanwhile, Trichy district reported seven more new cases taking the total count to 95. MGMGH discharged two more patients of Trichy on Tuesday. The hospital has a total of 28 active cases from Trichy, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Chennai, airport quarantine and railway quarantine.

A 35-year-old man tested positive for Covid-19 in Perambalur district. The patient was employed in a weighing bridge at Alathur. Health workers have collected samples from 16 people who were his primary and secondary contacts. Close to 70 trucks have used the weighing bridge where the patient worked.


