Delhi lockdown: Truck drivers stranded, supply of essential items likely to be affected
2020-03-27
NEW DELHI: Movement of freight trucks to and from Delhi has been disrupted following the lockdown. Several trucks are still stuck at the state borders. Truck operators, meanwhile, claim that many drivers have already left for their villages. It may affect the supply of goods to Delhi in the coming days, they add.


SP Singh of Indian Foundation of Transport Research and Training said that while movement is getting restored, it is nowhere near normal. “The exodus of truck drivers due to fear factor has begun. They too want to be with their families, and it has become difficult for them to get water or food.”

Singh said a large number of truck drivers has already gone back to their villages in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Odisha. “At their homes, they will at least get two square meals,” he added.

Naveen Kumar Gupta, secretary general of the All India Motor Transport Congress said that everyone is waiting for a formal circular with guidelines from the Centre. “Although trucks carrying essential goods are exempted, one has to understand that after unloading the essential goods, the truck can’t go back empty. It will get stranded, leading to scarcity of vehicles,” he added.

Both Singh and Gupta said that truck drivers are unable to get food and water and wherever they are stranded, the local administration should help them. “There is also a need to spread awareness about social distancing among drivers,” Gupta said.

“There are not many trucks at Sanjay Gandhi Transport Nagar as most are still stuck at borders. As dhabas have closed everywhere, we provided food to the drivers here,” said Sandeep Jain, president of the Traders Welfare Association of the transport hub.

“Though there is some relaxation in some parts of the country, it is not the case everywhere. Truck movement across the country has been disrupted. Loading and unloading of goods is also not happening at many places due to manpower shortage,” said B Channa Reddy, president of All India Truck Operators Confederation.


