Trump says he's taking malaria drug in case he gets coronavirus
2020-05-19
WASHINGTON: President Donald Trump said Monday that he is taking a malaria drug to lessen symptoms should he get the new coronavirus, even though the drug is unproven for fighting Covid-19.



Trump told reporters he has been taking the drug, hydroxychloroquine, and a zinc supplement daily “for about a week and a half now.”

Trump spent weeks pushing the drug as a potential cure for Covid-19 against the cautionary advice of many of his administration's top medical professionals.

The drug has the potential to cause significant side effects in some patients and has not been shown to combat the new coronavirus.


Lockdown 4.0: Live updates

Trump said his doctor did not recommend the drug to him, but he requested it from the White House physician.

"I started taking it, because I think it's good," Trump said. "I've heard a lot of good stories.”

He dismissed reports of side effects, saying, “All I can tell you is, so far I seem to be OK.”


More on Covid-19

 Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
 Lockdown 4.0: What's allowed and what's not in the three zones
 It's time to mask up and stay safe: Join TOI's #MaskIndia campaign
 MHA's guidelines for home isolation
 Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news

Trump repeatedly has pushed the malaria drug hydroxychloroquine with or without the antibiotic azithromycin, but no large, rigorous studies have found them safe or effective for preventing or treating Covid-19.

They can cause heart rhythm problems and other side effects. The Food and Drug Administration has warned against the drug combo and said hydroxychloroquine should only be used for coronavirus in formal studies.

Two large observational studies, each involving around 1,400 patients in New York, recently found no benefit from hydroxychloroquine. Two new ones published Thursday in the medical journal BMJ reached the same conclusion.

One, by French researchers, gave 84 hospitalised patients the drug and 97 others the usual care.

There were no differences in the odds of death, need for intensive care or developing severe illness.

The other study from China was a stricter test: 150 adults hospitalised with mild or moderate illness were randomly assigned to get hydroxychloroquine or usual care.

The drug made no difference in rates of clearing the virus or time to relief of symptoms, and they brought more side effects.

In April, the National Institutes of Health launched a study testing hydroxychloroquine versus a placebo drug in 500 hospitalised COVID-19 patients. Last week, NIH announced another study to see if hydroxychloroquine plus azithromycin can prevent hospitalisation or death in people with mild to moderate illness.

About 2,000 US adults with confirmed coronavirus infections and symptoms such as fever, cough or shortness of breath will get the drugs or placebo pills.

