TTD joins hand with state govt in fight against Covid-19
2020-03-29
Tirupati: The Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) has joined hands with the state government to combat the outbreak of the novel coronavirus in Chittoor district. 

According to TTD chairman YV Subba Reddy, collector Narayana Bharat Gupta has requested the temple body to provide assistance in terms of establishing quarantines, procurement of ventilators and other medical equipment, supply of food packets, etc.

“The novel coronavirus is a global pandemic, which has impacted the lives of lakhs of people. The need of the hour is for everyone to join hands with the state and central governments to defeat it. As part of these efforts, TTD has decided to provide ventilators and other medical equipment necessary for the district administration to effectively combat Covid-19”, underlined Subba Reddy.

In fact, the first venereal diseases research laboratory in the state was set up at the TTD managed Sri Venkateswara Institute of Medical Sciences superspecialty hospital in Tirupati to carry out coronavirus tests on samples collected from various districts across Andhra Pradesh”, pointed out the TTD chairman.

Similarly, based on the requests of the state government, TTD’s choultries near the Tirupati railway station and the newly built Sri Padmavathi Nilayam pilgrims amenities complex at Tiruchanoor have been handed over to the Chittoor district administration to convert them as temporary quarantine facilities.

Following several appeals from the district administration as well as locally elected representatives, TTD will start providing free food packets to the homeless, destitute and those housed at the quarantine facilities in the temple city and its surrounding areas.

“TTD’s Annaprasadam wing at Tirumala serves free food to nearly one lakh people every day. But, now that the temple is closed and Annaprasadam services are suspended, we have asked the department to provide 50,000 free food packets to the needy till the lockdown continues. Going by the TTD’s motto ‘service to humanity is service to god’, these food packets will be distributed to the people with the help of the municipal, revenue and other departments of Chittoor district administration”, asserted the TTD chairman.

The novel coronavirus is a global pandemic, which has impacted the lives of lakhs of people. The need of the hour is for everyone to join hands with state and central governments to defeat it


