TTD’s timely lockdown prevented outbreak of Covid-19 among pilgrims
2020-04-27
Covid-19 has unleashed an unprecedented crisis the world has never seen before. This is perhaps the first time in the history of man that the borders of all nations, states and districts are sealed to prevent the outbreak of this dangerous novel coronavirus. Covid-19 has impacted every single country in the world.

While the unpreparedness of the developed nations was exposed by the coronavirus crisis, India continues to strongly fight back Covid-19 under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who leads a family of 137 crore people, like a Vasudaika Kutumbham.

The timely decision of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) to suspend the darshan for devotees at Tirumala prevented Covid-19 outbreak at Tirumala.

The TTDP acted in time and closed the world renowned Tirumala temple for devotees on March 20, five days before the nationwide lockdown came into effect.

With nearly 80,000 to one lakh devotees visiting the Tirumala temple from across the country and the world, it could have been disastrous if there were an outbreak of the virus in the temple city. This eventually would have had a cascading effect across the country.

But the TTD management could prevent the outbreak of the novel coronavirus at Tirumala by initiating a number of precautionary measures even before the lockdown. This includes performance of Yagams to save the mankind from coronavirus.

Seeking the divine intervention to save the mankind from the coronavirus global pandemic, TTD organized Srinivasa Veda Mantra Arogya Japa Yagnam from March 16 to 25 and Sri Srinivasa Shantyutsava sahita Dhanwantari maha yagam from March 28 to 30 at Tirumala.

''Vedaparayanam'' recital has been going on every single day at Tirumala from April 10 and it will be continued till the world is relieved of the deadly coronavirus.

The TTD has immersed itself in the fight against Covid-19. Sri Venkateswara institute of medical sciences established the first Covid-19 testing lab in Andhra Pradesh. This continues to test samples received from across Andhra Pradesh.

Sri Padmavathi medical college hospital has been converted into a state Covid-19 hospital and Sri Padmavathi nilayam at Tiruchanoor into a state government's quarantine facility. TTD trust board sanctioned Rs 19 crore towards the purchase of necessary medical equipment.

The TTD has turned into a saviour for the poor during the nationwide lockdown, by distributing 1.4 lakh free food packets in Tirupati since March 28. It has also been distributing three tonnes of fodder to various goshalas in Tirupati, besides feeding 500 odd stray cattle and dogs.

The village volunteers system, a brain-child of chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy, has come as a blessing not only for the people of the state but also for institutions like TTD. It is because of the strong network of village volunteers, all state government aid and welfare schemes are delivered at the doorsteps of people.

The fact that several states have taken Andhra Pradesh as a role model to replicate village volunteer system stands testimony to the success of the local governance model.

Though Tirumala temple remains closed for pilgrims, all the daily, weekly, monthly and annual festivals continue to be performed at the sacred abode of Lord Venkateswara as per the prescribed agamas, some of which are telecast live on SVBC. Through SVBC, devotees continue to stay connected to their ''Kula Deivam'' - the living God through Govinda Nama Smarana 24/7.

While the whole world has come to a standstill due to Covid-19, only prayers can show us the light of a new beginning. Like it is rightly said ''Prayers can move mountains'', our earnest appeal to all devotees is to stay home and stay safe and make a silent prayer within the comfort of home for the universal well-being.

Let us all recall what saint poet Tallapaka Annamacharya said ''Chedaneeka Brathikinche Sidda manthrama, Rogalanachi Rakshinche Divyaushadhama'', which means it is the supreme deity Lord Venkateswara, who alone can save us from any disaster and He is the divine medicine that can cure any critical illness and keep us safe.

Let us all join chorus with Annamacharya and sing in praise of Lord Venkateswara to relieve the world of this novel coronavirus.

(The author is the chairman of the TTD Board)


