TTD’s lockdown prevented outbreak among pilgrims
2020-04-27
Covid-19 has unleashed a crisis the world has never seen before. This is perhaps the first time in the history of mankind that the borders of all nations, states and districts have been sealed following an outbreak. 

While the unpreparedness of the developed nations was exposed by the coronavirus crisis, India continues to strongly fight back Covid-19 under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who leads a family of 137 crore people, like a Vasudaika Kutumbham.

The timely decision of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) to suspend the darshan for devotees prevented Covid-19 outbreak at Tirumala.

The TTD closed the world-renowned Tirumala temple for devotees on March 20, five days before the nationwide lockdown came into effect. With nearly 80,000 to one lakh devotees visiting the Tirumala temple from across the country and the world, it could have been disastrous if there were an outbreak of the virus in the temple city. This eventually would have had a cascading effect across the country.

The TTD management performed Yagams to save mankind from coronavirus. Seeking divine intervention to save mankind from the coronavirus pandemic, TTD organised Srinivasa Veda Mantra Arogya Japa Yagnam from March 16 to 25 and Sri Srinivasa Shantyutsava sahita Dhanwantari maha yagam from March 28 to 30 at Tirumala.

“Vedaparayanam” recital has been going on every single day at Tirumala from April 10 and it will be continued till the world is relieved of the deadly coronavirus.

The TTD has immersed itself in the fight against Covid-19. Sri Venkateswara institute of medical sciences established the first Covid-19 testing lab in Andhra Pradesh. This continues to test samples received from across Andhra Pradesh.

Sri Padmavathi medical college hospital has been converted into a state Covid-19 hospital, and Sri Padmavathi Nilayam at Tiruchanoor into a state government’s quarantine facility. The TTD trust board sanctioned Rs19 crore towards the purchase of necessary medical equipment.

The TTD has turned into a saviour for the poor during the nationwide lockdown. It has distributed 1.4 lakh free food packets in Tirupati since March 28. It has also distributed three tonnes of fodder to various goshalas in Tirupati, besides feeding 500-odd stray cattle and dogs.

The village volunteers system, a brain-child of chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy, has come as a blessing not only for the people of the state but also for institutions such as TTD. It is because of the strong network of village volunteers, all state government aid and welfare schemes are delivered at the doorsteps of people.

The fact that several states have taken Andhra Pradesh as a role model to replicate village volunteer system, stands testimony to the success of the local governance model.

Though Tirumala temple remains closed for pilgrims, all the daily, weekly, monthly and annual festivals continue to be performed at the sacred abode of Lord Venkateswara as per the prescribed agamas, some of which are telecast live on SVBC. Through SVBC, devotees continue to stay connected to their “Kula Deivam” -- the living God through Govinda Nama Smarana 24/7.

It is rightly said, “Prayers can move mountains”. Our earnest appeal to all devotees is to stay home and stay safe and make a silent prayer for the universal well-being.


(By YV Subba Reddy. The writer is the chairman of the TTD Board)


