Turned away by government hospital, Covid-19 patient dies in Meerut; DM sets up inquiry
2020-04-27
Meerut: A grocery shop owner, 66, who was turned away by a government hospital four days ago despite clear Covid-19 symptoms, died after his condition deteriorated on Saturday night in Meerut. Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial Medical College (LLRM) had eventually admitted the patient on Friday night after he was brought there and got a seizure while being sent back again. He passed away on Saturday evening, prompting protests by his family members who claimed that he could have been saved. Meerut’s district magistrate Anil Dhingra has ordered a probe into the death and sought a report from the hospital.“My father didn’t return home. I pray that such negligence is not repeated and no one else goes through what we faced,” his son said. A probe has been ordered.Dr RC Gupta, principal of LLRM Medical College, said, “A written clarification has been sought from the on-duty doctor who returned the patient after prescribing him with medicines. The patient tested positive for Covid-19 a day after he died of brain stroke.”According to the family, the elderly man first went to the government hospital late on Tuesday.“My maternal uncle lived in Kesarganj’s Dal Mandi area. For the last few days, he had symptoms of coronavirus, like fever and breathlessness. He was first taken to a private hospital, where he was given medicines and asked to rest at home.“This is when I contacted the Meerut chief medical officer (CMO) and told him that our patient was symptomatic and was not being admitted to the hospital. He (the CMO) assured action. I also contacted the Meerut DM, who also assured action. On Tuesday night, around 11pm, an ambulance took him to LLRM Medical College where he was given medicines and asked to return home. With no ambulance in place, he returned home on foot around 1:30am,” his nephew said.When contacted, CMO Dr Raj Kumar said, “I got a call from the patient’s family on Tuesday night, and I sent an ambulance to their house for to collect samples. However, the further investigation was meant to be done by the LLRM staff. I am asking for a written report in the matter.”His health deteriorated on Friday evening and he was again taken to the hospital.While the elderly man was again being sent back home, he got a seizure. It prompted the staff to admit him this time. But he died the next evening. His test report, which came on Sunday, confirmed that he was infected with the contagious disease. With the death, the toll in Meerut mounted to five. Dr Gupta further said, “There was no delay in providing the test reports. His sample was first taken on Wednesday, which tested negative. His sample was again tested on Saturday, whose report came positive on Sunday.”However, his family maintains that the sample was taken just once, on Wednesday.