Bengaluru: Turned away by 2 hospitals on Covid-19 fear, woman gives birth in third
2020-04-19
BENGALURU: A pregnant woman, 29, from Mysuru, who battled breathlessness and was turned away by two hospitals here as they feared she was suffering from Covid-19, finally delivered a baby girl in a third hospital on Saturday morning.


The woman, in the 36th week of pregnancy, was refused admission on April 17 as she was from Mysuru, a Covid hotspot with 80 cases so far, including a cluster.

On Friday, she came to Bengaluru in a private car. She went from the CRPF composite hospital to Apollo hospital in Seshadripuram and then to MS Ramaiah hospital where she was admitted after the state government intervened. She’s now in the ICU where her condition remains critical.

Earlier, she had been admitted to a private hospital in Mysuru for three days.

After being discharged, her condition worsened and doctors suggested she seek help in Bengaluru. She had a low pulse rate and was wheezing and breathless. At Apollo hospital, she was screened but not admitted.

She was asked to go elsewhere for a Covid-19 test.


Pregnant woman’s kin: It was traumatic

Apollo hospital said she was stable and was screened by clinicians. “She was not due for delivery, had mild fever and was breathless. We have only two isolation beds for Covid-19 suspected cases and couldn’t admit her and put others at risk. We asked her to go to a hospital with Covid-19 testing facilility,” said Uday Davda, head, Apollo hospital.

Following a TOI scribe’s tweet late Friday night about the woman’s plight, the Janasnehi team of the government’s information department contacted the hospital. “Till midnight, one of our volunteers was in the hospital to make sure she was admitted,” said a coordinator. The woman’s relative said: “It was traumatic taking her from one hospital to another.”

Six voluntary donors associated with Lions’ bloodline, Sanjaynagar, came to her rescue on hearing she needed blood.“She was diagnosed with a cardiac disease in Mysuru and was admitted to our hospital late Friday night. She had a history of miscarriages. We did a C-section delivery and she’s on ventilator. If there are no complications, she will be shifted to a ward soon,” said Dr Naresh Shetty, president, MS Ramaiah Memorial Hospital.

