Twin trouble for cultivators: Rain and virus wreak havoc in Rajasthan
2020-03-27
JAISALMER: Farmers are faced with a double whammy, amidst the lockdown in the wake of coronavirus pandemic and the rough weather. In last two days, rain has damaged the crops which were ready for harvesting. Along with this, the labourers have gone to their villages due to which farmers are unable to get their crops harvested. There is heavy shortage of labourers due to which, loading and unloading of food items is also getting affected. 


Truck drivers have gone to their homes and are not available to load trucks for transporting food items. In Jaisalmer’s Nachna, Mohangarh canal areas and other areas with tubewells, crops of wheat, jeera, mustard are ready to be harvested but farmers are not getting any labourers for it. And where the crops have been harvested, they are lying in the fields and not being gathered, for want of labourers. 

According to the information, due to lockdown, all public transport is closed and labourers from the neighbouring places are not coming to the canal area and the labourers who were there, have gone to their villages due to which there is a shortage of labourers. A farmer said that due to rain for last two days, the worries of farmers have increased. 

In Nachna on Wednesday, there was hailstorm as well and similarly in Barmer district also, there is information of damage caused to crops due to rain. The farmer said that untimely rain and hail have caused heavy damage to the crops. This is the time when farmers harvest the crops and sell in the market and earn money, but now the farmers have to face economic crisis. Earlier, locusts damaged the crops and now, the coronavirus and rain have wreaked havoc on them. 

Barmer SND Jaisalmer district administration in a release said that those farmers who have insured their crops under PM Fasal Bima Yojana can inform the insurance company within 72 hours of the damage caused to crops lying in fields after harvest due to untimely rains. Many places in Barmer and Jaisalmer witnessed rains on Thursday and farmers have been requested to inform the agriculture department or insurance company within seven days about the damage to crops. There is also the added problem of distributing food items due to the shortage of labourers. 

