Two more Covid-19 cases found in U’khand, tally now 59
2020-05-03
Dehradun: Two more Covid-19 positive cases were reported in Uttarakhand on Saturday, taking the state’s tally of patients to 59. Meanwhile, two other Covid-19 patients were discharged in the day after full recovery. Now, the total number of active cases in state are 19. Among them, the maximum active cases are in the state capital.

According to health department, among the two positive cases reported on Saturday, one is a trainee (MBBS final year student) at All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) Rishikesh and the other is the helper of a Covid-19-positive truck driver from Udham Singh Nagar.

UB Mishra, dean of hospital affairs at AIIMS Rishikesh, informed that the trainee was working in the emergency department of the institution since April 16.

“A Covid-19-positive woman patient has been kept in the emergency department. We suspect that the trainee may have got the infection from her. We have quarantined the entire hostel where the intern was staying and are testing her primary contacts. We are sanitising all the areas, including the main emergency section and the mess, frequented by the intern. AIIMS will treat general emergency patients in Covid-19 emergency wards for the time being,” he said, while adding that the trainee is stable and her family has been informed about the infection.

With the trainee getting infected, AIIMS Rishikesh has reported three cases of infection among healthcare workers and doctors in last one week.

Meanwhile, regarding the helper of the truck driver, who was tested Covid-19-positive last week, chief medical officer (CMO) of Udham Singh Nagar Dr Shailja Bhatt said that the truck driver had travelled from Punjab to Haridwar and then to Bajpur with his aide.

In some positive news, two Covid-19-patients were discharged from Government Doon Medical College and Hospital on Saturday. Now, a total of 39 positive patients have recovered in the state. The health authorities have tested 7,369 cases in the state so far.


