Two back from Switzerland, quarantined in Naidu hospital amid coronavirus fear
2020-03-09
PUNE: Two women who recently returned from a novel coronavirus-hit country were quarantined at the PMC’s Naidu Infectious Diseases Hospital on Sunday after they complained of minor illness. 


The other travellers who were quarantined on Saturday tested negative for the contagion. 

“Both the women developed flu-like symptoms after returning from Switzerland. Their throat swab samples have been sent to the National Institute of Virology for testing. None of the travellers quarantined earlier have tested positive for the contagion so far,” public health expert Sanjeev Wavare of the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) said. 

At present, the Naidu hospital in Pune is the only designated isolation facility for residents/travellers returning from China and other affected countries. “The novel strain of the coronavirus has governments and health experts across the world on their toes. However, one of the oldest and most effective methods of containing a contagious virus has always been contact tracing. It is the most simple and efficacious way to contain the virus. But, in addition to health officials, it calls for participation from the society,” infectious diseases expert Sudhir Patsute said.

In contact tracing method, health officials find out who the suspected persons (in this case, travellers returning from affected countries) have been in contact with. Thereafter, they are isolated and tested for the infection.

Experts also stressed that the government should focus on spreading awareness about the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) infection at the moment, while quite a few neighbouring countries are scrambling to contain the contagion spread.

Medical practitioner and health activist Abhijit More said, “At present, the main thrust is on screening travellers returning from affected countries, isolating those complaining of minor illness and testing them for the coronavirus infection. But, the focus on disseminating information to the masses, creating awareness and educating them via media needs to be strengthened. Mobile service provider companies, too, have started spreading awareness about preventive measures among the masses.” 


