Two men commit suicide in MCH Covid isolation ward
2020-06-11
Thiruvananthapuram: Two suspected cases of suicides were reported at the deluxe pay ward of Thiruvananthapuram Government Medical College Hospital, which functions as an isolation ward for suspected/confirmed cases of Covid-19.

One is a 33-year-old man, who was brought to the hospital as a Covid patient and recovered recently and the other is a 38-year-old man, who was brought here on Tuesday night and was awaiting his test results.

The recovered Covid-19 patient from Anadu near Nedumangad had run away from hospital on Tuesday, the day he was to be discharged. He was caught from near his home and brought back. A nurse who brought him prescription to be taken after discharge found him hanging round 11.30am on Wednesday. He was rushed to a critical care unit, but could not be saved.

The man was admitted to the hospital on May 29 with Covid symptoms. He was an alcoholic and was brought to the hospital in an unconscious state. When the hospital authorities tested his swab, his test results turned positive. Though he had travelled to Tamil Nadu a day before for buying spurious liquor, health officials are yet to trace the source of his infection.

Police said that as per official communication from MCH authorities, he had turned negative in the last two tests following which they were planning to give him discharge. The procedures for the discharge were going on when he sneaked out of the hospital.

He caught a rickshaw from MCH to reach Thampanoor from where he took a bus to Anadu. However, before he could reach home, locals spotted him and informed police and health officials, who took him back to the hospital.

Hospital sources said they had given him counselling before admitting him again. A police officer attached to MCH police station said the entire family of the deceased has been quarantined.

Health Minister K K Shailaja asked health principal secretary to conduct a probe and file a report on both the suicides. State Human Rights Commission too has registered a suo motu case and has sought an explanation from the medical education director and superintendent of MCH.

Murukesan (38), the second person who allegedly killed himself, was found hanging in the evening in his isolation ward. He was from Nedumangad and was brought to MCH on Tuesday night with symptoms of Covid-19 and was under observation. He too had reportedly taken a trip to Tamil Nadu recently.


