Two more fresh Covid cases
2020-05-03
Thiruvananthapuram: A day after Kerala reported no fresh Covid positive cases, two people were tested positive in the state on Saturday.

The two new cases are from Wayanad and Kannur. The detection of a positive case after 32 days forced Wayanad, which had been a green zone till day, into orange zone category. As many as eight people were recovered from the disease on Saturday. Of this, six were in Kannur and two in Idukki.

So far, there were 499 Covid-positive cases reported in Kerala. Among them, 96 are under treatment in hospitals. As many as 80 symptomatic people were admitted to hospitals on Saturday. A total of 21,894 people are under observation and of them, 410 are in hospitals.

On Friday, no positive case was reported and nine persons were tested negative.

Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan said the time has not come to say that Kerala was free from the chances of community spread of the disease. As a result, the government was constantly assessing and revising the list of activities that could be allowed in the state without compromising on the health security measures against Covid-19, he said.

The CM said the government has decided not to open liquor outlets for the time being. “It doesn’t mean that government has decided not to open the outlets throughout the lockdown period,” he said.

Educational institutions will remain closed during the lockdown, but they will be free to conduct examinations by complying with the safety standards prescribed by health department. Public transport would continue to be off from roads while inter- district transport would be allowed, subject to conditions in all zones. Shops in green zone areas can function from 7am to 7.30 pm. Textile shops in green and orange zones functioning out of single-storied building have also been granted permission to function with a maximum of five employees.

Vijayan said a more decentralised planning was being put in place to ensure the safety of vulnerable group of people comprising of elders above 65 years of age, children below 10 years and others who suffer from critical illness. Ward-level monitoring committees would be set up for monitoring them and the service of private hospital staff would also be solicited for the wellbeing of the aged and those suffering from terminal illness, he said.


