Two cancer hospitals in Kolkata on Covid-19 alert
2020-04-18
KOLKATA: A cancer patient with Covid-19 symptoms died at a premier cancer hospital in New Town on Thursday while another with similar symptoms at another cancer hospital in Thakurpukur had to be shifted to MR Bangur Hospital on Friday.


It prompted both hospitals — Saroj Gupta Cancer & Research Institute (SGC&RI) at Thakurpukur and Tata Medical Centre — to adopt precautionary measures. While SGC&RI sent 10 hospital staffers, who had come in contact with the patient, on home quarantine, Tata Medical Centre said it will follow prescribed norms.

“The patient was being treated in the isolation ward where there are four more suspected cases. But the rest of the patients have tested negative and they have been shifted to normal wards. Though all healthcare providers in the isolation wards worked with PPE, we have asked 10 of them to be on home quarantine for now to rule out any risk,” said Arnab Gupta, medical director at SGC&RI.

A Tata spokesperson said the death has been reported to the health ministry. “We are following the prescribed protocol and necessary measures will be taken,’ he said.

A 50-year-old man from Hatibagan Road died at Tata Medical Centre on Thursday night. He was suffering from blood cancer and was admitted on April 8, according to his family. Prior to that, he was treated at a local nursing home where his cancer was detected a few weeks ago. The family was asked to take the patient to the New Town hospital.

“He was doing fine with multiple blood transfusions. But since Wednesday, his condition started deteriorating. Around 11.30pm on Thursday, we got a call saying the patient has expired,” a relative told TOI. The deceased used to work as a mechanic at a private company at Moulali that supplies power generators. Family members said he had stopped going to his workplace after the lockdown. 

Meanwhile, a 75-year-old lung cancer patient from Murshidabad who was under treatment at SGC&RI at Thakurpukur had to be shifted to MR Bangur — a designted Covid hospital. Ten healthcare workers have been sent on home quarantine after the incident. According to sources, the patient had arrived at the Thakurpukur facility on April 14 and had symptoms like shortness of breath. Hospital officials said the patient was admitted in the isolation ward because he was a high-suspect case and his swab samples were sent for tests the next day.


