Two cops among 26 test +ve for Covid in Agra, dist tally now 430
2020-04-30
Agra: Two constables of Agra police were among 26 new Covid-19 positive cases reported in Agra on Wednesday, taking the district tally to 430. 

Out of these, one case was related to a bank manager of a national bank and a resident of Tajnagri colony, two cases were related to sanitation worker of SN Medical College (SNMC), three linked to a private hospital on National Highway-2, a resident of Kotwali locality who had been distributing food in lockdown, two contacts of an infected nurse of SNMC, while three cases were related to a wholesale medicine seller who had tested positive earlier. 

The cases of two constables come just five days after a constable cook (follower) of Agra police lines was found Covid-19 positive, forcing the police to shut down their kitchen which was serving food to more than 300 cops daily.

Two constables were posted at Sikandra police station, and one at Agra dial 112 unit of Chhatta police limits. Nine cops who came in contact with the corona positive cops have now been quarantined.

Speaking to TOI, superintendent of police (city) Rohan Botre said, “The two cops have been sent to isolation facility. Contact tracing has begun to quarantine people who met the cops in the last few days. The Covid-19 sampling, too, will be done.”

He further said, “Cops are the frontline force working round the clock even in hotspots. So, we are not sure as who is the first contact and from whom the two constables got infected.”

Notably, 29 cops of UP police, including four sub inspectors, four head constables, 15 constables and one constable cook (follower) have tested positives in Kanpur, Agra, Firozabad, Varanasi, Bijnor and Moradabad. 

Chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All the 26 new Covid-19 patients have been shifted to an isolation facility. A team of doctors is attending to them. People are being screened in the area around their houses and the places they had visited. Their contacts are being identified. We will conduct a health check of all these people." 

According to the health department, out of the 327 cases which have surfaced in Agra, at least 105 are related to people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi and their contacts, while 95 cases are linked to a private hospital on the NH-2. Another 25 cases are related to a private hospital in Rakabganj locality and a clinic in Ghatiya Azam Khan locality. 

Besides, 60 cases are related to healthcare workers and their contacts, while 26 are linked to those who had travelled abroad and their contacts. 

Meanwhile, six vegetable sellers, a medicine seller and a milk seller have been tested Covid-19 positive. These people are unaware of their source of infection. “So far, 95 people have been cured and discharged. People who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patients are being screened. Area around these places where the infected were staying is being sanitised. At present, there are 32 active hotspots in the city. They are being closely monitored. We are doing massive sampling in these areas," the CMO added.


