Coronavirus scare in Jaipur: Two from South Africa quarantined at SMS Hospital
2020-03-08
JAIPUR: Two South Africa nationals with symptoms of influenza-like illness were admitted to the SMS Hospital here on Saturday. They have been quarantined and their samples taken and sent to the hospital’s laboratory for testing. The report was awaited till late on Saturday.


Two persons from UK and one each from Japan, China and Germany were already under quarantine in the SMS Hospital since the past few days. The hospital claimed that they all are fine and will soon be shifted to a hospital attached to the RUHS College of Medical Sciences in the city for monitoring their health. They all tested negative for Covid-19.

The condition of the Italian couple, who tested positive for novel coronavirus (Covid-19) and is undergoing treatment at the SMS Hospital, is steadily improving. The 69-year-old man, though, is still on ventilator support.

“He is improving. He was admitted to the hospital not only with symptoms of Covid-19 but also of other diseases. He is suffering from bronchitis and that is why he is taking more time to recovery. His breathing has improved and we are monitoring his blood oxygen saturation level, which too has improved,” said Dr D S Meena, medical superintendent, SMS Hospital, about the Italian tourist.

The tourist’s wife, who too tested positive for Covid-19 and is undergoing treatment here, wrote to the Italian embassy expressing concern over the facilities at the SMS Hospital and demanded that the duo should have been shifted to any other private hospital. She wrote to the embassy about the facilities given to her and her husband in the hospital.

The hospital administration claimed that it has provided the couple every facility, including hygienic food and water. “We are purchasing water from outside the hospital for them. They are being given hygienic food of their choice from outside the hospital. 

They are our guests and we are providing them our best services. We are mopping the room at least three times a day. Even after taking so much care, they have been sending mails to their embassy,” said a hospital administration official.

The hospital administration further explained that since 14 other Italian tourists, who were part of their group and are undergoing treatment at Medanta Hospital in Gurugram after testing positive for Covid-19, the couple in Jaipur might be thinking of getting shifted to Gurugram.


