Two youths & a 40-year-old test Covid-19 positive in Aurangabad
2020-04-22
Aurangabad: Two youths from the Samtanagar area and a 40-year-old man from Bismillah Colony confirmed positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday, taking the total number of active cases to 17 in the city and the tally of positive cases to 35. The confirmed positive patient from Bismillah Colony is the son of a woman in her 60s, who recently succumbed to the infection. The possible source of infection from whom the two youths contracted Covid-19 could not be ascertained till late Tuesday evening. Moreover, two patients who had been put in isolation for 14-days have again tested positive for the contagion during the second round of testing. Hence, they will continue to remain in the isolation ward. Sharing details about the new confirmed cases, district civil surgeon Sundar Kulkarni said that the two youths testing positive for Covid-19 should ring as a warning bell for others in the same age group. “While one youth is 18-years-old, the other is 20 years. The source of infection for the duo is still not known. We are checking their travel history. Two youth from the same locality contracting the infection at the same time should be a message for youngsters to strictly follow the lockdown norms,” said Kulkarni. He added that the man from Bismillah Colony, who has contracted the disease from his mother, was stable and receiving the treatment as per protocol. Notably, on Monday, Aurangabad MP Imtiaz Jaleel visited a few localities where reportedly a large number of youths are not complying with the lockdown norms. While ardently appealing to the youngsters, Jaleel asked them not to step out of house unless extremely necessary. “Remember that you have parents back home.. they will face irrevocable loss if you meet any unfortunate tragedy,” said the MP while visiting different areas. While the number of Covid-19 cases continues to rise gradually in Aurangabad, six other districts in Marathwada seemed to have brought the spread of the infection under control with no new cases post April 16. Nanded is the only district where not a single positive Covid-19 cases has been reported. Till Tuesday evening, there were total 50 cases in Marathwada.Meanwhile, the Aurangabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) on Tuesday announced a special task force to trace people who have come in contact with confirmed as well as suspected cases of Covid-19.A release issued by the civic administration stated that the task force would be led by senior civic authorities. It would be responsible for tracing tracking such contacts and sending them to quarantine facilities if they show symptoms of Covid-19. 