Two doctors fight back Covid, urge plasma donation
2020-04-26
Surat/Rajkot: Four patients, including a young doctor who were detected with Covid-19, were discharged from the Jayaben Modi hosiptal in Ankleshwar after their samples tested negative on Saturday. 

With this about 14 patients have been discharged in Bharuch out of the total 25 positive patients. Seven patients were discharged in Bharuch on Friday. 

The patients discharged from the hospital have been identified as Dr Brijesh Narola, a 28-year-old gynaecologist of Bharuch Civil Hospital, Rajesh Rana from Bharuch town and Ankita Rana and Kinjal Gohil from Valia taluka of the district. Dr Narola, a native of Amreli, had joined the hospital one year ago.

“I would urge all those patients who have recovered to donate plasma. This can be a life saviour for other Covid patients,” Dr Narola told TOI.

Health officials said that the patients undergoing treatment at the Covid-19 hospital in Ankleshwar are stable and showing signs of recovery.

Vadodara also saw six patients fully recovering within 24 hours ending on Saturday noon. While three patients including Dr Faizan Qureshi, a doctor from Mogalwada area got discharged on Friday evening, three other patients including two from hotspot Nagarwada and one from Bahar Colony on Ajwa Road got discharged on Saturday from GMERS Medical College and Hospital, Gotri after their repeat tests came negative. With addition of six patients, the total recoveries in Vadodara have reached 56. The district has so far recorded 234 positive cases.

Talking to TOI, an emotional Dr Qureshi said, “It’s because of God’s grace and the commitment of hospital staff that I have recovered.”

In Rajkot, two Covid-19 positive persons were discharged from the civil hospital on Friday night after they recovered fully from the infection. According to health department officials, Altaf Pathan and Zarina Patni, both 40 years, were discharged. They are residents of Jangleshwar area which has become the hotspot of Covid-19 in the city. Pathan was admitted on April 7 while Patni was admitted on April 10. 

In Bhavnagar, Yunush Qureshi, 52, a resident of Sandhiyavad area, a Covid hotspot, was also discharged from Sir T hospital on Saturday evening. He was admitted in the hospital on April 8. 

In all, 10 patients have been discharged in Rajkot out of total 41 who tested positive while 20 have recovered in Bhavnagar out of total 38.


