Two more Covid deaths in Akola; CRPF to be deployed in Amravati
2020-05-16
NAGPUR: The Covid-19 situation in Akola turned more serious on Friday when two more deaths were reported. With highest 17 deaths in Vidarbha region, Akola now has 218 cases of Covid-19, only behind Nagpur, which recorded 18 cases on Friday and a total of 336. Another red zone district — Amravati — recorded four new cases.

Looking at the rural and local spread of Covid-19 in Amravati, two companies of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) with 120 jawans reached the city on Friday. They will be deployed in urban and rural containment zones in the district.

Vidarbha region is marching towards 800-mark now. With 36 deaths and one suicide, there have been 780 cases of Covid-19 in Vidarbha. Only respite is the increasing recovery rate. On Friday, Nagpur (53) and Akola (28) together discharged 81 patients. With this, total number of recovered patients reached 430, which means the recovery rate of Vidarbha is 55.12%. 

Akola continued to record double digit increase in the number of Covid-19 patients on the sixth consecutive day on Friday. Total 11 cases — 5 women and 6 men were reported. A 37-year-old woman from Akola’s Firdauz Colony, who died on May 14, also tested positive for Covid-19 on Friday. A 65-year-old woman, a patient of Covid-19, died in the isolation ward. She was under treatment from May 11. 

Following new discharge policy, Akola released 28 patients on Friday. Out of these, four patients went home while the other 24 were shifted to Covid Care Center as they did not have required home isolation facilities in their densely populated localities. 

Amravati is fast nearing the century mark as four new Covid-19 positive cases today took the district’s count to 94. A 42-year-old woman health worker at the local Panjabrao Deshmukh Medical College Hospital and a 55-year-old man, under treatment for Severe Acute Respiratory Illness (SARI) at Covid hospital here, are among the four who tested positive on Friday. 

The rest two include a 37-year-old female contact of a Warud woman, who tested positive in Nagpur earlier this month, and a 60-year-old woman from Ravidas Bhavan area in Sweepers Colony of Masanganj ward.

The health worker from PDMCH is a resident of Uttam Nagar and has been in isolation since a patient she treated at the isolation ward of the hospital a week ago tested positive a few days later. She is one of the six hospital staffers quarantined at Prabodhini here. She has now been moved to Covid ward. She is the third health worker to test positive, after two males from Covid hospital (r/o Ambika Nagar and Belpura) tested positive a day before. Uttam Nagar is now a new locality giving a positive patient. Her contacts are being traced and isolated.

Naval said that a 350-bed permanent Covid hospital with all modern facilities is being set up in the premises of Ayurved Mahavidyalaya at Mozari and 100-bed Covid hospitals will come up in the premises of Trauma Care Centre at Achalpur and Rural Hospital at Chandur Bazar. 

While Mozari falls in the constituency of guardian minister Yashomati Thakur, Achalpur and Chandur Bazar are in the constituency of state minister Bachchu Kadu.

Meanwhile, collector Shailesh Naval has acquired seven government, semi-government and private institution buildings and hostels in the city for quarantining contacts of Covid positive cases.

Yavatmal recorded no new positive patient for the fifth consecutive day on Friday. After discharging 53 out of the 98 cases so far, there are 45 active cases in Yavatmal GMCH now. Barring the one positive patient, who is critical since his admission over 50 days ago and tested positive five times, all others are recovering speedily.

No positive Covid-19 case was reported from Chandrapur either. Condition of two patients detected positive so far is stable. None of the relatives or close contacts of two patients have been found positive so far. Same is the case of Wardha and Washim too. Both districts have one active patient each and all their close contacts have tested negative so far.


