Delhi: Two-thirds of new Covid-19 cases in crowded areas
2020-04-21
NEW DELHI: There’s a new worry for public health officials in Delhi. Two-thirds of the new Covid cases in the capital have cropped up in high-density areas with poor urban infrastructure where social distancing is hard to implement. The city’s major hotspots are located in such areas, rendering contact tracing a much more difficult task.


“The majority of the 84 containment zones in Delhi are in densely populated areas and we are detecting new cases in these areas every day,” said a South Delhi Municipal Corporation official. “Merely disinfecting these slums, unauthorised colonies and urban villages is not sufficient, more intense strategies will have to be adopted.” The five red hotspots of Nizamuddin Basti, Chandni Mahal, Tughlaqabad Extension, Tilak Vihar and Jahangirpuri are in this category.

Daily analysis of corona cases indicates that both incidence and transmission rates are higher in these belts. An EDMC official remarked that while successful containment has been achieved in Dilshad Garden, there is concern about the highly vulnerable areas of Trilokpuri and Kalyanpuri where it is very difficult to enforce the lockdown. “Residents are still coming out of their homes and vendors are there on the streets. People do not seem to understand the gravity of the crisis,” an official remarked.

Jahangirpuri in North district has six containment zones in B, C, H and K blocks. Madanpur Khadar in Southeast district has an identical number in Kachchi colony, Khadda Colony and Mehela Mohalla, while Sangam Vihar in South district has three. There are several containment zones withing the Walled City.

Bhupinder Gupta, chairperson of SDMC’s standing committee, said that the higher number of containment zones in dense areas signified that the lockdown was not being correctly followed by the residents. “This lack of seriousness is evident in people sitting in groups in front of their houses playing cards and vegetable vendors not using masks and gloves as directed,” Gupta remarked. He added that time slots would for fixed for sale of vegetables and “civic officials will start booking the violators”.

Such problem areas, as highlighted by civic officials, are Sangam Vihar, Nihal Vihar, Molarband, Dilli Gate, Brahmapuri, Kalyanpuri, Seelampur, Hari Nagar, Chandni Mahal, Sant Nagar in Burari, Sunder Nagri, Jahangirpuri, Khadda Colony Jaitpur and Kachchi Colony Madanpur Khadar. 

Principal scientific advisor to the central government, professor K VijayaRaghavan, has now issued separate guidelines for densely populated areas with clear norms for areas where people share communal facilities for toilet, bathing, etc. The guidelines recommend strict enforcement of face cover for everyone, foot-operated hand-washing stations, regulations for using the community toilets and other common facilities and norms to be followed in small homes. An SDMC official said that these guidelines are being studied and will soon be implemented in vulnerable clusters.


