Two more Covid patients dead, toll reaches 10, health dept still in denial
2020-06-05
Dehradun: Two patients, both from Muzaffarnagar district of Uttar Pradesh, admitted to All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Rishikesh, who had tested positive for Covid-19, were reported to have died at the hospital on Thursday. With this, the death toll of Covid-positive patients reached 10 in the Himalyan state of which nine deaths took place in the past two weeks. The health department has, however, refused to attribute any death to Covid-19 and has instead said that co-morbid illnesses are behind the deaths.

Speaking about the recent deaths, authorities of AIIMS Rishikesh told TOI that the first patient, a 26-year-old man from Muzaffarnagar’s Purkazi locality, was admitted to the hospital on June 1 after he complained of breathing issues and high fever. The second patient was a 25-year-old woman from the same city who had been complaining of loose motion and vomiting for over a fortnight. “She was unconscious for the past four days,” said Dr Madhur Uniyal, Covid-19 nodal officer at AIIMS who added that a report is being prepared to ascertain the exact cause of the death. Both the patients had tested positive for Covid-19.

State health officials meanwhile continue to maintain that of the 10 deaths of Covid-19-positve patients in the state, six were due to co-morbid illnesses.

As for the remaining four, Abhishek Tripathi, nodal officer of Covid-19 war room at the health directorate, said, “Cause of the death at a quarantine centre in Pauri is still not known even after post mortem. We are also waiting for death audits in the three other cases.” 

Attacking the state government over its denial to accept Covid deaths, Congress vice-president Suryakant Dhasmana, said on Thursday, “How can the CM announce compensation for family of Covid victims when the health department is not ready to accept any death as Covid death? The tall claims are simply an eyewash to fool the people.” 

Meanwhile, 68 new Covid-positive cases were reported in Uttarakhand on Thursday, taking the state’s tally of Covid patients to 1,145.

The total count of active cases in Dehradun now stands at 324, followed by Nainital at 310.

Providing a breakup of the fresh cases on Thursday, Yugal Kishore Pant, additional secretary (health), said that 36 new cases were reported from Dehradun and 10 from Nainital. He added, “Champawat reported three new cases, followed by 10 in Tehri, four in Pauri, two in Bageshwar and one each in Uttarkashi, Almora and US Nagar.” 

In another related development, the state government on Thursday signed an MoU with CSIR-IMTECH Chandigarh to enhance the Covid-19 testing capacity in the state, which now has a sample pendency of over 6,000. After the MoU, samples from the states can also be tested in Chandigarh.


