Two suspected coronavirus patients die at LLR Hospital
2020-04-17
Kanpur: A nine-year-old girl and a middle-aged man died in the COVID-19 section of LLR hospital on Thursday morning.They had been admitted to the hospital on Wednesday night. Their samples have been sent to COVID-19 lab of GSVM Mmedical College to confirm whether they were suffering from cornavirus, medical authorities said. 

As many as 38 quarantined cases were found negative in tests and they have been allowed to go home with certain instructions. So far, around 1,038 quarantined persons have regained health and left quarantined centres.

According to a bulletin of health department, 36 suspected cases have been admitted to the hospital and three out of them were found positive.

Dr Ashok Shukla in the evening informed that authorities had planned to load 92 samples in the evening and 46 out of them were from Ghatampur.

The second sample report of five members of Tablighi Jamaat was termed as negative. Six Jamaatis were admitted at an isolation ward of COVID-19 section of LLR hospital and report of five was found as negative. Now only one Jamaati is infected and being treated, as confirmed by the GSVM lab report on Wednesday.

As many as 22 suspeccted cases were found at Suffa Mosque, Babupurwa and Badi Mosque of Baripal under Sajeti police. They were isolated at Naraina institute. Seven out of them were foreigners and they belong to Afghanistan (two), Iran (three) and Britain (1).

On April 1, their samples were sent to KGMC Lucknow and on April 3, six out of them were adjudged as corona positive. One Afghanistani was declared as negative. Thereafter, they were being treated at COVID- 19 hospitl. Their second sample was sent to GSVM medical college lab on Tuesday night and on Wednesday report revealed that five of them were now negative. The man who has been found positive belongs to village Bilhari of Sultanpur district, according to Prof R K Maurya, chief medical superintendent of LLR hospital.

Meanwhile, three educational institutes on Thursday came forward and donated Rs 42 lakhs for fight against corona. According to district magistrate Brahmdeo Ram Tiwari, a cheque of Rs. 21 lakh was given by Dayanand Education Group, UP by Manvendra Swarup, cheque of Rs 15 lakh from JK Group and Rs 6 lakh from DAV Law College by principal Yatindra Shukla.

HAL prepared and donated a treatment Unit.

Hindustan Aeronautics Limited ( HAL) has prepared a corona kit for mediacl staff.

HAL authorities gave a demo of this kit via a documentary film before Satish Mahana, state industries minister, DM, SSP Anant Deo and Dr Arati Lalchandani, principal GSVM Medical College. 

The authorities also informed that HAL staff was also preparing masks and head gears for the doctors and para-medical staff.

Meanwhile, the district administration continued its efforts to maintain lockdown in hotspot and red zone areas. The administration used drones for aerial survey and police kept a strict vigil on road.

Municipal corporation continued sanitization work in red zones and hotspot areas.


