Two coronavirus cases push Uttar Pradesh tally to 11, Toronto doctor in KGMU isolation
2020-03-13
LUCKNOW: Two fresh Covid-19 positive cases took the state’s tally to 11 on Thursday — one is from Lucknow and the other from Ghaziabad. Two patients were also quarantined in Mathura and Delhi on suspicion of contracting the virus in the past 24 hours. While one is a foreign national, the other a resident of Agra. 


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Currently, seven cases from Agra, one each from Noida and Ghaziabad have tested positive to the disease, which has been declared a pandemic by World Health Organisation on Wednesday.

Lucknow’s patient is a 35-year-old resident of Canada, who came to Lucknow to meet her relatives in Gomtinagar, said nodal officer, coronavirus, Dr Vikasendu Agarwal. “While the woman and her husband have been quarantined at King George’s Medical University, seven of her family members have been isolated at home. Also, throat swabs of 22 persons, including family members who were in contact with the couple, have been sent for testing to confirm or rule out Covid-19,” he said. Late Thursday, all 10 relatives of the doctor tested negative to covid-19.

Chief Medical Officer, Lucknow, Dr Narendra Agarwal said, the patient is Toronto-based doctor who reached Lucknow via London and Mumbai on March 1. “She did not pass through thermal scanners as the procedure was set rolling in airports after March 5.

 The Canada-based doctor had touched down in Lucknow four days before,” he said.

Faculty, medicine department and in charge of infectious diseases cell, KGMU, Dr D Himanshu said: “The patient reached out to us on March 8. We got both of them tested and found they had high viral load, but no symptoms. So we advised home isolation as symptoms often show up 5-10 days after exposure. Their swab samples were sent to check Covid-19. Of the two, the woman tested positive, while the man was asymptomatic.”

Stating that the patient was stable, Dr Himanshu said: “We are closely monitoring her. She has mild respiratory tract infection. It will take at least 14 days for her to recover. Thereafter, she will b0e kept in observation for 14 more days to fend off relapse.”

Fresh swab samples of the patient and her husband were sent to the laboratory again on Thursday and results remained unchanged. Earlier, five suspected coronavirus patients were admitted in KGMU since the onset of the disease, but no one tested positive.

The patient from Ghaziabad is the son of a man, who tested positive to the disease last week. Admitted in Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, Delhi, the patient had returned from Iran. After he tested positive, health authorities quarantined six of his close contacts and sent their samples for testing. Of them, the patient’s son tested positive to the disease at 3 am on Thursday.

The state health department has decided to compulsorily quarantine from Friday all travelers, including Indian nationals, arriving on or after February 15 with a travel history to China, Iran, South Korea, Italy, Germany, Spain and France. 

They would be isolated for a minimum period of 14 days. Health officials convened an inter-departmental meeting with officials of Panchyati Raj, education and urban development departments to work on a coronavirus management and containment plan. 


