Two Covid-19 deaths in Agra, 85-yr-old passes away in Meerut
2020-05-29
AGRA/MEERUT/BAREILLY: Two Covid-19 deaths were reported in Agra on Thursday. A 76-year-old man of Malpura and 57-year-old woman of Ravindra colony passed away. Both the individuals were suffering from multiple health issues. So far, 38 Covid-19 deaths have been reported in Agra district. Also, an 85-year-old man passed away in Meerut, taking the Covid death toll in the district to 25.

In Agra, at least seven new Covid-19 cases surfaced till Thursday evening, taking the district tally to 882, while Meerut reported two fresh cases, taking its tally to 401,which included one found in Kanpur.

Sambhal recorded six new cases, taking the district tally to 84. All the fresh cases are migrant labourers who recently returned from Delhi, Ahmedabad and Tamil Nadu, according to Sambhal CMO Dr Amita Singh. "A 14-year-old boy is among the positive cases here,” Singh said. And of the 84 cases so far, 33 are active while 51 have recovered and discharged. 

The new cases in Agra district were four patients of Severe Acute Respiratory Infection (SARI), a patient suffering from chest pain and vomiting at SN Medical College, an ICU patient of a private hospital and a 32-year-old businessman. Four patients were also discharged. Out of the 882 cases reported in Agra district, 87.85% have recovered and discharged - and there are 70 active ones. CMO RC Pandey said, “So far, 774 people have been discharged.” 

Meerut's district surveillance officer Dr Vishwas Chaudhary said, "As many as two people tested positive in Meerut on Thursday. While one is a 52-year-old vegetable seller from Sector 2 of Shastri Nagar, another is a 58-year-old woman from Kidwai Nagar. Also, an 85-year-old man from Brahmpuri died at LLRM Medical College, taking the death toll to 25. He was a patient of hypertension and bilateral pneumonia." 

Five people, including two brothers, were found infected in Bijnor district. They are Mumbai returnee migrant labourers. Bijnor's CMO Vijay Yadav said, “Five people were found infected, taking the tally to 88. Out of them, there are 40 active cases.”

Six migrants, from other states, tested positive in Mainpuri, taking the tally to 31, which includes two deaths in the district. As of now, 17 patients, including six migrants, are admitted at hospital.


