Hyderabad: Two IPS probationers test positive for Covid-19 at NPA, one is asymptomatic
2020-06-10
HYDERABAD: Two Indian Police Service (IPS) probationers undergoing training at Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy (SVPNPA) tested positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday. The young officers, who returned to the academy recently after completion of their district practical training (DPT) in north India, are undergoing treatment at the Academy hospital as per new protocols.

Over 130 IPS probationers of the 2018 batch (71 RR), who finished DPT in different states as per their allotted cadre, had returned to the academy between June 5 and June 7 for Phase-II training. As soon as they arrived at the academy, the probationers were put under quarantine at guest houses and hostels.

“On June 8, samples of 131 probationers have been sent for testing. On Tuesday, we received results of 86 probationers. Two of them were positive,” Academy director Atul Karwal told TOI. The two probationers were immediately sent to Academy hospital for treatment. One of the probationers has mild fever, while the other was asymptomatic. A probationary officer of Punjab cadre had finished his DPT at Bhatinda, while the second officer of AGMUT cadre finished his DPT in Delhi. 

According to sources, he was attached to a DCP of Delhi, who recently tested positive for Covid-19. The test results of the remaining 45 probationers might come in by Wednesday. Apart from the 131 probationers of the 2018 batch, about 170 probationers of the 2019 batch were currently undergoing training at the academy.

Authorities started contact tracing. They have informed officials of the two probationary officers’ parent cadre so that they could place the staff who were in close contact with the IPS probationers in Bhatinda and Delhi under isolation. “Put together, there are about 300 IPS trainees at the academy. Those who have returned from field training as part of DPT have been kept under quarantine for 10 days. We have taken all precautions to prevent the spread of Covid-19,” the director added.


