Two US firms in race to develop vaccine
2020-01-25
MUMBAI: In the first step taken by a global entity to tackle the coronavirus outbreak that has raised fears of a pandemic, three programmes involving two US biotech companies are trying to fast-track potential vaccines against the rampaging nCoV-2019.


Cepi, a global alliance financing and coordinating development of vaccines against infectious diseases, will fund these "pioneering technologies" to speed up the development of vaccines against emerging threats like nCoV-2019, Gagandeep Kang, its vice chairperson, told TOI here on Friday.

The World Health Organisation has declared the new coronavirus an emergency for China, where several deaths have been reported, but stopped short of declaring it a global epidemic.

Coronaviruses can lead to respiratory illness, including severe acute respiratory syndrome, and are transmitted between animals and people. They can evolve into strains not previously identified in humans. On January 7, a new coronavirus was identified as the cause of pneumonia in the Chinese city of Wuhan. Additional cases have been detected in a growing number of countries, including Thailand, Vietnam, Singapore, Japan, South Korea and the US.

US-based companies Inovio and Moderna, and the University of Queensland in Brisbane, will leverage rapid-response platforms (in separate programmes) already supported by Cepi along with a new partnership to fast-track coronavirus vaccine candidates into clinical testing.

"Our aspiration with these technologies is to bring a new pathogen from gene sequence to clinical testing in 16 weeks, which is significantly shorter than where we are now," Richard Hatchett, CEO of Cepi, said.

Cepi (Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations) launched at Davos in 2017 to develop vaccines to stop future epidemics. It is also working on programmes for vaccines against the chikungunya, Ebola, MERS and Lassa viruses.

Speaking on the sidelines of the Indian Society for Clinical Research conference here, Kang said the idea at Cepi was to be prepared for what may be the next outbreak, instead of being reactive.

The organisation awarded Inovio a $9 million grant to develop a vaccine against the new strain of coronavirus. The initial funding will support Inovio's pre-clinical and clinical development through Phase 1 human testing, according to a company statement. Further, Cepi will invest up to $10.6 million on University of Queensland's programme to develop a "molecular clamp" vaccine platform, a transformative technology that enables targeted and rapid vaccine production against multiple viral pathogens, the release adds.

Under the agreement, Cepi announced a new partnership with Moderna and the US-based National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases to manufacture an mRNA (messenger RNA) vaccine against 2019-nCoV. 

