Two fresh Covid cases from Hindpiri, one in Deoghar dist
2020-04-25
Ranchi/Dumka: Jharkhand recorded three more Covid-19 cases on Friday, taking the state’s tally to 59. Of these, 48 are active cases, while nine have recovered and two died during treatment.

Confirming the development, state health department secretary Nitin Madan Kulkarni said: “We detected three cases on Friday — two from Ranchi’s Hindpiri area and one from Bhurkunda village in Deoghar’s Sarwan block.

In Ranchi, a man and woman aged 36 and 25 from Hindpiri tested positive on Friday. Talking to TOI, Ranchi SDM Lokesh Mishra said: “The two are residents of Hindpiri and they were screened during a contact tracing exercise in Nizam Nagar locality. The likely source of infection in both of them are from a distant family member who lives in the same locality.”

In Deoghar, the district administration sealed Bhurkunda village started a screening and contact tracing exercise after an 18-year-old migrant labourer who returned from Gujarat last month tested positive for Covid-19.

Deoghar DC Nancy Sahay said: “This is the second Covid-19 case in the district. The patient was in a quarantine centre at Kasturba Gandhi residential school with his brother after they returned from Surat in Gujarat. “

Sahay said the patient has been transferred to Maa Lalita Hospital in Deoghar, which is exclusively treating Covid-19 cases. Both the positive patients in the district continue to be asymptomatic.

Meanwhile, the 22-year-old Malaysian woman, who became the first Covid-19 case in the state when she tested positive on March 31, was discharged from Rims on and shifted to a quarantine centre at Khelgaon on Friday evening. The woman is a member of Tablighi Jamaat and had attended the outfit’s markaz in Delhi last month.

Other members of the group who have tested negative are also lodged at the same quarantine centre. As police have registered a case against all the members of the group for violation of visa norms, they are set to be shifted to jail soon.

Talking to TOI, Ranchi SSP Anish Gupta said: “The Malaysian woman has been shifted to a Khelgaon quarantine centre and the whole group will be sent to jail on Saturday after they are produced before a court.”


