Two new Covid cases surface in Varanasi
2020-05-29
Varanasi: Two new Covid positive cases took Varanasi’s tally to 162 on Thursday. Besides, 10 new Covid infected persons were detected in Azamgrh, four in Ghazipur and Ballia each, three in Jaunpur, two in Mau and one in Sonbhadra.

Varanasi DM Kaushal Raj Sharma said, “Of the 55 test reports received from BHU laboratory two persons were found Covid positive—an 18-year-old boy of Chhitauna village of Chaubeypur area and another boy of the same age in Daniyalpur in Sarnath area, who had returned home from Mumbai by truck and train.

Now, the total number of Covid positve cases in Varanasi has reached 162. Out of 162, as many as 90 had recovered while four had died. Number of active patients in the district is 68 now. There are 58 active hotspots in Varanasi now. 

In Azamgarh 10 new COVID-19 positive cases came to light, said DM NP Singh adding, the total number of cases in the district has reached to 65. Among the newly detected patients, three are from Kharauti, Mohammadpur who had returned home from Mumbai in truck, while three youths of Mehnagar, Rani ki Sarai and Shivpur Maharjganj who had returned to their homes from Mumbai by motorcycles.

In Mau, DM Gyan Prakash Tripathi informed that two youths of Dharmpur village and Madao Fatehpur, who had also returned from Mumbai, tested positive. Now, total number of positive cases in the district has reached to 22.

In Ballia, DM Hari Pratap Shahi confirmed four new infected persons. A woman (50) of Pakadi block, 23-year-old man from Shobha Chhapara Muralichhapara, 40-year-old man from Hridayapur Muralichhapara and a 45-year-old man from Chiranjiv Chhapara were shifted to Azamgarh hospital after they tested positive. Now, total Covid count of Ballia has reached to 35.

One youth of Khempur village in Sonbhadra, who had returned home from Surat by truck on May 14, tested positive. Sonbhadra CMO said that the total number of Covid cases have now reached to seven.

In Ghazipur, the total Covid count reached to 97 with the detection of four new cases including two youths who returned to Nandganj from Mumbai, confirmed DM Omprakash Arya.


