Two migrant workers die, Covid test reports awaited
2020-05-16
BETTIAH/BHAGALPUR: A 40-year-old migrant worker, who had returned home from Delhi/NCR on Tuesday, died at Bettiah’s MJK Hospital & Government Medical College here early Friday morning. “We are waiting for the results of his sample test,” West Champaran DM Kundan Kumar told this newspaper.

“The body will be disposed of as per protocol after confirmation of sample test,” the DM said.

“ The deceased was found COVID symptomatic with high fever, cough and loose motions on his return from Delhi. He was promptly hospitalised after screening,” Kumar further said, adding, the deceased had also shown co-morbidity conditions like bronchial infection and hypertension.

In a similar incident, authorities at Bhagalpur are waiting for the Covid-19 test report of a migrant worker, who fell unconscious and died at a hospital hours after arriving on a Shramik Special from Chandigarh on Wednesday.

The 50- year-old migrant worker fell unconscious at Bhagalpur railway station after getting off the special train that brought 1,293 migrants from Punjab.

Health department sources said apart from high fever, the deceased also had trouble breathing and was rushed to the Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College and Hospital (JLNMCH) in an unconscious state.

Dr R C Mandal, superintendent at JLNMCH, said, “The migrant worker died shortly after he was brought to the hospital. Swab sample is being tested for Covid-19.”

The hospital manager, Sunil Kumar Gupta, said the migrant worker’s condition was critical and he could not be saved despite being put on ventilator support.

Earlier, the Bettiah deceased along with three of his co-workers, including his brother, had returned from Delhi on Tuesday on a hired four wheeler. While the other two migrants carried on to their separate villages in the vicinity, local sources said the brothers, on reaching their village in Yogapatti block, avoided entering their home and camped in a bamboo grove close by.

A couple of villagers then took them to the local Primary Health Centre and further to the quarantine centre at the Lakshmipur High School.


