Covid-19 scare in Bihar: Two hotels to be used for isolation facilities
2020-03-17
PATNA: The state government has asked Airports Authority of India (AAI) to provide real-time information of passengers coming to Bihar from foreign countries.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

In the first meeting of state coordination committee formed for Covid-19, the state government also decided to turn one hotel in Patna and another in Bodh Gaya into isolation centres for people coming from coronavirus-affected countries. “Hotel Patliputra Ashok with 200-bed capacity in Patna and another hotel in Gaya with 100-bed capacity have been earmarked for isolation purpose,” health department additional secretary Manoj Kumar told TOI on Monday. 

He said passengers coming from China, Democratic Republic of Korea, France, Germany, Spain, Italy and Iran will be quarantined at these hotels. Manoj said passengers have been put into three categories — high risk, moderate risk and low risk. High-risk passengers are those who have fever, cough, shortness of breath with a history of travelling to a country reporting local transmission of Covid-19. They will be kept in isolation ward in hospitals.

However, asymptomatic passengers, who are elderly with morbidity or other health condition and coming from six affected countries will be in the moderate category and will be quarantined in either of the two hotels for 14 days. Those who are asymptomatic with no health condition, but coming from six affected countries will be quarantined for a day or two and will be taught about proper home isolation.

He further said many people coming from foreign countries were evading self-declaration form. “We have asked the airport authority to provide us real-time data so that such passengers could be traced inside the state,” Manoj said. 

During the meeting, state tourism department was told to hold meetings with all the hotels and be updated about guests, especially those who are from affected countries. Even state transport department was asked to maintain hygiene in public transport and sanitize their buses regularly.

IPS officer, wife test negative: The Jharkhand cadre IPS officer and his medico wife, who were quarantined at Patna Medical College and Hospital (PMCH) on return from Italy, tested negative for coronavirus, state health department additional secretary Manoj Kumar said, adding that their test report came on Monday. The couple had skipped mandatory 14-day isolation on their arrival and stayed in a city hotel from where they were brought to PMCH. 


