Two-month-old, West Bengal’s youngest Covid-19 survivor, goes home with mom
2020-05-17
KOLKATA: A two-month-old boy is the state’s youngest Covid survivor, who battled the infection for two weeks and is now completely free of the contagion after being released from MR Bangur Hospital last week. A resident of Park Circus, the infant was only 55 days old when he was admitted with his mother who had also tested positive for the disease. Both mother and baby were kept at a secluded isolation room and a core team of doctors, including paediatricians, pulmonologists and chest physicians, was formed to take care of them. 

The efforts bore fruit as the baby recovered within 10 days and his mother followed soon after. “The baby had undergone the then-mandatory consecutive double-negative test and was rendered free of the infection. But since the mother was still under treatment he could not be released. The two were released together last week and are doing well,” said a senior official of the hospital.

Doctor Sisir Naskar, superintendent of MR Bangur Hospital — the state’s largest Covid hospital — told TOI that the case was a challenge for the attending doctors. “Since the boy was very young — the youngest patient we had handled till now — the situation was extremely challenging and we needed to take extreme precautionary measures. Because of his tender age, he could not even be kept in isolation away from his mother, who was also undergoing treatment. But we are happy that both recovered in quick time,” said Naskar.

Doctors said the best thing about the child was that he had a very mild infection and was mostly asymptomatic. “His speedy recovery has boosted our morale and we are now more confident about dealing with critical patients,” said Naskar.

On May 4, the state’s oldest novel coronavirus survivor, 88-year-old Sarojini Mukherjee, had recovered after being treated at the hospital for two weeks. TOI carried a report on Friday on how Mukherjee and her entire family —who also tested positive — have fought the disease and are now absolutely fit.

So, far the hospital has had two infant Covid-19 patients, one who was discharged after treatment and another — a four-month-old child also suffering from Kawasaki — who was shifted to another hospital and is still under treatment. “We have, however, successfully treated at least six kids under eight, one of whom was critical and needed dialysis twice a week and another who was only 8 months old,” said an official.

The hospital also has a separate isolation room for Covid-positive new mothers. 


