Lucknow: Two survivors bring hope for Covid-19 patients
2020-04-26
LUCKNOW: Dr Tauseef Khan, a resident doctor at King George’s Medical University (KGMU), was fasting on Saturday but that was not what made him special.

What made him different was that despite fasting he lay on a recliner at transfusion medicine department to donate plasma, becoming one of the first two persons in UP to donate plasma for convalescent therapy being tried across the world for treatment of Covid-19 patients.

Dr Khan was not alone in the pursuit as he was joined by 53-year-old Uma Shankar Pandey in the noble cause.

Both Dr Tauseef and Uma Shankar had contracted coronavirus infection earlier in March and recovered fully after undergoing treatment at KGMU. Having experienced the disease up and close, the two decided it was their time to give back hope to other patients by donating plasma.

Dr Tauseef contracted the infection while treating the first Covid-19 patient of Lucknow – a Canada-based doctor. However, it didn’t affect his resolve to treat patients by all possible means.

“My family was a little apprehensive as I had to fast from dawn to dusk. They were afraid that I would feel weakness due to plasma donation. I dispelled their misconceptions and finally got their support,” he told TOI.

His two brothers also encouraged him in his endeavour. The doctor also issued a video appeal calling upon other patients to donate blood.

Uma Shankar Pandey (53) from Lakhimpur Kheri also reached KGMU on Saturday morning for plasma donation. Pandey said he was admitted to the hospital on March 18 after a trip to Turkey.

“I have got a new lease of life after treatment. Since I was getting information about plasma therapy through news, I decided to be a donor. If I can save even one life, my being alive will become meaningful,” he said.

“I did not feel any problem while donating plasma. Even during illness, I kept my calm and hoped for recovery,” said Pandey, who returned to his village Maiganganj with his son on Saturday evening.


