Two cousins tricked into hospital fight back Covid
2020-04-27
Surat: “I will not talk to my papa as he lied to me that day,” – asserts a grumpy four-year-old Jeet Rana, while coming out of New Civil Hospital (NCH) after defeating the dreaded virus on Sunday. 

Jeet, a resident of Maan Darwaja tenement, was discharged from the hospital along with his five-year-old cousin Vadik Rana after they recovered fully from the virus. Earlier, the duo tested positive on April 18 and had to be taken to the hospital on the sly. 

Jeet was told that the doctors are taking him to his aunt’s house but he was miffed as landed at the hospital instead. “I did not like the hospital as doctors were giving me bitter medicines all the time,” the little fighter said, unhappy with the hospital jaunt. 

Jeet and Vadik tested positive during a community sampling drive by SMC at Maan Darwaja tenement - a hotspot of coronavirus infection with more than 140 cases detected in the last few days.

Interestingly, parents of both the children tested negative during the community sampling. Doctors allowed the mothers of both the children to accompany them in NCH’s separate paediatric ward for Covid positive children.

“How is it possible that both our sons tested positive and we were negative?” asked Yogesh Rana, father of Jeet, a diamond polisher in Mahidhapura. 

Rana said that he had been very tense after his son stopped talking to him over phone in all these days. “My son doesn’t want to talk to me as I had to lie to take him to the hospital. What could I have done?” the hapless father rued. 

Jeet’s mother Ranjana said, “Our children had no symptoms of the infection and were playing in the ward as if they were at home. We are lucky that our sons have tested negative and got discharged from the hospital.”

Vadik’s mother Jigisha said, “Corona came and went in just one week. I am happy that both our sons are healthy and have recovered very fast. We faced lot of problems like proper food, water and space to sleep at the hospital, but we compromised for the well-being of our sons.”


