Two more Covid-19 cases found in Uttarakhand, six recover
2020-05-09
DEHRADUN: Uttarakhand reported two new Covid-19 positive cases on Friday taking the total number of of coronavirus patients in the state to 63. 

According to the health department, the first case was reported from Udham Singh Nagar and the other from Iqbalpur in Roorkee.

Harish Thapliyal, public relations officer of AIIMS Rishikesh, informed that the 31-year-old patient from Roorkee was suffering from a severe stomach ailment and before being admitted to AIIMS Rishikesh, the patient had been to Max Hospital in Rampur’s Chungi area and to Vinay Vishal Hospital. His checkup was done at one hospital and ultrasound at the other private facility.

“He came to AIIMS Rishikesh on Thursday (May 7) as he was suffering from pancreatic and stomach ailment. We conducted his Covid-19 test and his samples tested positive today (May 8). The patient claims that he didn’t travel anywhere outside Roorkee between April 25 and May 5 and just visited the two hospitals on May 6,” said Thapliyal, while adding that primary contacts of the patient are being traced so that they can be tested for the virus. 

As for another positive case from Udham Singh Nagar, district’s Chief Medical Officer Dr Shailja Bhatt told TOI that the patient was working in a hotel in Delhi and he had come back to his native village in Kashipur town on May 6. The man’s screening was done and his samples were collected after he reached his village. 

“Three people had come to Kashipur with this patient. Fortunately, they all tested negative. We are transferring the patient to Dr Susheela Tiwari Hospital in Haldwani,” she added.

Meanwhile, six Covid-19 positive patients recovered fully on May 8. With this, the total number of active cases has dipped to 17 in the Himalayan state. Among the six cases who recovered on Friday, five patients were discharged from Government Doon Medical College and Hospital and the other was AIIMS Rishikesh staff nurse.

As around 70% patients have recovered from the disease, the number of containment zone have been reduced to five in Dehradun, and one each in Nainital, Haridwar, and Udham Singh Nagar districts, as per the bulletin issued by health department. The state, till May 8, conducted 9,116 Covid-19 tests. 


