Coronavirus: Two return from China, kept in isolation in Bettiah & Bhagalpur
2020-02-05
PATNA: Two persons, who had returned from China last week, have been kept in isolation at their homes in Bettiah and Bhagalpur as a precautionary step against the deadly coronavirus (CoV).

State surveillance officer Dr Ragani Mishra said, “As of now, no symptoms of CoV have been detected in any of them. But as a precautionary measure we have kept them under observation for 14 days.”

Earlier, two people were kept under observation in Sitamarhi and Saran. “We tested both coronavirus suspects, one from Sitamarhi and the other from Saran. Their test reports ruled out CoV,” Mishra said.

Amid fears of spread of a CoV spread, at least 4,295 people in the border areas and 1,467 passengers at Gaya airport have been subjected to thermal screening till February 2. However, no positive cases of coronavirus have been reported in state so far.

The state health department has alerted hospital superintendents, civil surgeons, and officials at state airports and border areas to keep a check on people travelling from China and Nepal.

“We have started working in various parts of the state, especially in the districts situated near the Nepal border. Camps are being set up in the border areas for keeping an eye on people with even minimal symptoms,” Mishra said.

She added: “More than 3,381 health workers have been appointed to spread awareness about the deadly disease in every district. DMs are also holding Gram Sabha meetings with panchayat members and anganwadi workers. Altogether 275 gram sabha meetings have been held so far for which 783 Panchayati Raj Institution members were appointed by the health department.”

In the state capital, doctors have advised residents not to panic, but take precautions. PMCH medical superintendent Bimal Kumar Karak said coronavirus has symptoms similar to viral fever and respiratory problems.

“People should take extra care of themselves as well as their family members. They should make sure they wear masks while commuting on the roads. Besides, they should seek medical aid even if they get a simple cold or cough,” Karak said.

City residents are worried about the coronavirus scare. “Being an asthma patient, I frequently get breathing issues. These days, I have to take extra precautions due to coronavirus. I make sure that I don’t leave my house without wearing a mask. I have asked my family members and friends to do the same,” Ankita Sinha, a resident of Saguna Mor, said. 


