Two test Covid-19 +ve in central region
2020-05-06
TRICHY: The central region of the state reported a decline in the progression rate of Covid-19 cases after a day of sudden spike with two cases being reported in Trichy and Perambalur on Tuesday. As many as 39 cases were reported from the region on Monday.

A 30-year-old man from Pullambadi area in Trichy tested positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday. According to sources, he was a Koyambedu returnee.

The district administration identified 28 Koyambedu returnees and tested their samples. Four of them tested positive on Monday.

The public health department was in the process of collecting samples of the positive patient’s close contacts and secondary contacts. The district administration took samples from 667 people who returned from Chennai and other states recently. Of them, five tested positive including Tuesday’s case for Covid-19.

The new positive case took the tally of Trichy district to 56. Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Government Hospital has so far treated 47 cases. As many as nine patients from Trichy, nine patients from Ariyalur, 12 patients from Perambalur and one patient from Pudukottai is undergoing treatment at MGMGH.

A day after reporting 25 Covid-19 positive cases, Perambalur on Tuesday reported only one positive case, a 5-year-old girl from Valikandapuram in Perambalur. The girl along with her family of four returned to Perambalur from Royapuram, Chennai in a truck on May 1. On information, health officials collected samples from the family members. All others in the family, except the girl, tested negative. A containment zone has been established at Valikandapuram. More than 200 people have been put under quarantine in the district.

In Ariyalur, no fresh Covid-19 case was reported on Tuesday. However, samples of 56 people who have returned from Chennai were collected. Officials said that Chennai returnees who tested negative were moved from institutional quarantine to home quarantine. They were told to alert the authorities if they develop any symptoms. A total of 455 people awaiting test results are in quarantine facilities established at nine places in the district.


