Two healthcare officials test positive for Covid-19, private hospitals quarantine staffers
2020-04-13
KOLKATA: Two emergency medical officers — one attached with Howrah District Hospital and the other with Ramakrishna Mission Seva Pratishthan —have been admitted to MR Bangur Hospital and ID Hospital respectively after they tested Covid-19 positive on Sunday. Two private hospitals have also sent healthcare workers on quarantine after patients who were being treated for other ailments tested positive to Covid-19.


While Charnock Hospital off VIP Road has sent around 40 healthcare workers into isolation and decided to seal the hospital for a thorough sanitization, S S Chatterjee Heart Centre (SSCHC) in Park Ccircus sent eight into quarantine.

 


According to sources, a patient who had come to the VIP Road hospital for dialysis died in another hospital, but his samples tested positive for the virus. Later, four others, who underwent dialysis in the VIP Road hospital, as well as a health worker, also tested positive. While one of them is being treated in the hospital, the rest are admitted in other facilities, including M R Bangur. “That is why we need to shut the hospital to conduct a thorough sanitization,” said a hospital source. The hospital has shifted or discharged a majority of the in-patients, barring 19. Arrangements are being made to move them too. 

At the Park Circus hospital, an 80-year-old from Beniapukur who had come with a heart ailment tested positive to the virus. The patient was admitted on Friday and sources said doctors tried to get the swab sample tested on Friday itself but could manage it only on Saturday. The test confirmed Covid-19 on Saturday night. “I myself was involved in the patient’s treatment. when I noticed he was developing respiratory distress, we decided to send his samples,” said S S Chatterjee, former head of cardiology at SSKM Hospital. The 71-year-old founder director of SSCHC has decided to be in home isolation for the next 14 days.

The patient was shifted to M R Bangur Hospital on Sunday and seven healthcare workers of the hospital have been sent into quarantine. Four others being treated in the same ICCU have been shifted to another unit while the ICCU is being sanitized.

“A patient with symptoms of Covid-19 infection who turned up the hospital’s emergency on March 29 later tested positive and was treated at ID Hospital. Because of this, we had kept seven employees, including three doctors, in isolation. One doctor tested positive,” said an official of Ramakrishna Mission Seva Pratishthan.

