Two more test positive for Covid-19
2020-06-09
Coimbatore: Two more people tested positive for Covid-19 in the district, including a 19-year-old nursing student in Coimbatore Medical College Hospital and a 70-year-old retired government employee. Both have been admitted in ESI Hospital. Besides this, one more person who returned from Chennai via road, also tested positive. The 19-year-old second year student, who returned to the city from Moolanur in Tirupur on Friday, rejoined her nursing college in CMCH and was asked for her samples on June 6, along with 80 other students. On Sunday, she was told that she had tested positive and that she had to move from her quarantine room to ESI Hospital. Four others with a travel history have also tested positive for the virus.The student had gone to Moolanur for 10 days to spend time with her aged grandparents. “In Moolanur, we live in a secluded farm, and except some farm hands and people supplying groceries, we did not meet anyone or go anywhere, so I am still surprised,” she said. “Once I tested positive, officials said my source of infection is likely to be in Tirupur, so now I am just praying my grandparents are not infected,” she adds. Besides her, another positive case was a 37-year-old man working in Mylapore, Chennai, who returned via Coimbatore and was headed to Ooty before deciding to take a break at his in-laws’ place in NGGO Colony. When he developed a light fever, he got tested and was found positive on Monday. Another retired government employee who took a train from Mumbai to Trivandrum, and from Trivandrum to Coimbatore by car, tested positive at Walayar check-post. He was later contacted the next day and was brought to ESI Hospital.This apart, a 31-year-old mother and her four-year-old son who flew into the city on Sunday from Chennai, tested positive for the virus. They both are admitted in a private hospital.A family of five covid-19 patients, from Kallakurichi, are also getting treated at PSG Hospitals, besides Coimbatore arrivals. The health department has also begun testing railway arrivals and tested 140 people who returned from Katpadi by train on Sunday night.