Two Covid Warriors among 26 +ves; 403 cases in May
2020-06-01
NAGPUR: A medical officer and a paramedical staffer contracted Covid-19 while working at MLA Hostel Institutional Quarantine Centre over last two months. They became the first health staffers in the district to test positive while serving corona positive and suspect patients. Also, 24 others from the district tested positive, taking the district’s total cases to 541 on Sunday.

The month of May has registered the highest number of cases at 403, including nine deaths. There were 122 cases including two deaths in April, and 16 cases in March. The district had recorded the first Covid-19 case on March 11.

The medical officer (40), a resident of Narendra Nagar, and paramedical personnel (43), a resident of Nandanwan, were admitted at isolation ward of AIIMS.

The medical officer works with zilla parishad at Kondhali, and was engaged with Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) for Covid-19 duty. The paramedical personnel works as multipurpose worker with state’s health department and was also under NMC for Covid-19 service. Their duty was to treat suspect and negative persons at the institutional quarantine centre and shift persons from the centre to isolation wards if they tested positive.

Recently, the health staff at MLA Hostel gave their swab samples, of which these two came positive.

Apart from them, 13 more persons from the city tested positive, including a 27-year-old man from Chhoti Masjid area, Sadar. He was working with a company in Aurangabad and returned home on May 25. He had fever since May 28 and took treatment from NMC’s UPHC and got admitted at IGGMCH on May 30.

Part of Sadar, famous for commercial market, will be new containment zone.

Six more from Naik Talao-Bangladesh area in East Nagpur tested positive, taking total from the city’s fourth hotspot to 32. A NMC team led by Dr Minakshi Mane quarantined 166 more persons from this area for a total of 276.

Two more persons from Tandapeth were admitted at IGGMCH for fever and cough, and tested positive. On Saturday, a woman from this area situated adjacent to Naik Talao area had tested positive.

Three persons from Golibar chowk under Mominpura containment zone, city’s second hotspot, also tested positive, taking tally of this zone to 250.

A female from Akola tested positive at IGGMCH. She had accompanied her mother, who tested positive in Akola, and a cancer patient for treatment here. Her mother passed away during treatment at IGGMCH on Sunday.

In Nagpur rural, 11 persons tested positive on Sunday. Six are family members of Covid-19 deceased from Lekchand Nagar at Digdoh, Hingna. Three family members of a car owner-cum-driver from Mahadulla, who tested positive a couple of days ago, also came positive.

Samples of a man from Kelwad in Saoner tehsil, who was quarantined after his family member tested positive at Saunsar, MP, came positive. A man from Khapa in Saoner tehsil was admitted at IGGMCH following fever and tested positive. He had returned from Chennai on May 26. Total number of cases from Nagpur rural have increased to 28.

As per new guidelines, 11 corona positive persons were discharged, 8 from GMCH and 3 from IGGMCH, increasing total number of discharged persons to 385. With eleven deaths, district’s active cases are at 145.

Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe reduced Satranjipura containment zone, city’s first hotspot, to 25%. The area around residence of latest deceased has remained a containment zone. Similarly, area of Jawahar Nagar containment zone was also reduced. Sangam Nagar containment zone was denotified as there were no new cases in last 28 days.


