Two Covid-19 suspects die at Doon Hospital
2020-04-23
DEHRADUN: Two suspected Covid-19 patients passed away while undergoing treatment at the Government Doon Medical College and Hospital (GDMCH), health officials said on Wednesday, adding that their samples had been sent for testing but the reports were still awaited. 


The officials said that it has been decided to hand over the bodies to the kin only after their test reports arrive (which were still awaited till the time of filing this article late on Wednesday).

According to doctors at GDMCH, both the patients were admitted to the hospital in the last 48 hours. While one of the patients was a 75-year-old (admitted late on April 20 night), the other was a 23-year-old who was referred to GDMCH from Coronation Hospital on April 21 afternoon. Both the patients were suffering from severe pneumonia and breathing disorder and were admitted to the ICU after the doctors found that they were critical. While the elderly man died at 10:03 pm on Tuesday, the other patient passed away at 10:08 pm on the same day.

Talking to TOI, Dr NS Khatri, nodal officer for Covid-19 cases at GDMCH informed that the elderly man had returned from Dubai and had come to Dehradun on April 6. The other patient was a cook at a government guest house where some foreign nationals had recently stayed.

“The Dubai-returnee had told us that he had undergone 14-day quarantine in Delhi and was tested negative for Covid-19. However, looking at the severity of the case and his travelling history, we sent his sample for Covid-19 test. Also, in the case of the 23-year-old, symptoms like severe pneumonia and chest congestion and the fact that he came in contact with foreign tourists made us see him as a coronavirus suspect and his samples were also sent for test,” said Dr Khatri, while adding that test reports of both the patients were awaited till late Wednesday evening.

“We had told the bereaved families to follow the procedure of cremation set for Covid-19 cases if they want to take the body immediately. However, their family members agreed to wait till the test reports come,” he added.

Meanwhile, four new Covid-19 cases recovered in Uttarakhand on Wednesday. With this, health officials said that the state has now managed to cure 50% of the total coronavirus-positive cases in the state. Additionally, no new positive case was reported on April 22. The cases who recovered on Wednesday were all from Udham Singh Nagar and Haldwani districts.

Additional secretary (health) Yugal Kishore Pant told TOI that a total of 214 test reports were received on Wednesday and all were found negative. The health department had sent 213 new samples for Covid-19 test on April 22.

“We have conducted 4,275 tests in Uttarakhand so far. Among them, 3,664 reports were found negative and 46 tested positive. As many as 23 cases have recovered at various Covid-19 hospitals in the state and hence, we have managed to cure 50% of coronavirus cases till now,” the official said.

Among the recovered cases, 11 are from Dehradun, six are from Nainital, and four from Udham Singh Nagar district. At present, 13 patients are undergoing treatment in Dehradun, seven in Haridwar and three in Nainital. 

The state till now has home quarantined over 65,000 people while 2,705 other cases have been quarantined in various facilities. Further, as many as 321 people are kept in hospital isolation. 


