Two more Covid-19 cases surface in dist
2020-05-26
Ludhiana: Two new cases of Covid-19 were reported in the district on Monday, taking the number of positive cases in the district till now to 267, including 88 from outside.Civil surgeon Dr Rajesh Bagga said, "As many as 123 samples were sent for testing, of which two are positive, while the rest are negative."The two testing positive for Covid-19 are a couple — 37-year-old male and 27-year-old female — from Khanpur in Dehlon of the district. They had returned from West Bengal on May 23. Their samples were taken on May 24 and sent to Rajindra Hospital, Patiala. They have been isolated at Meritorious School in Civil Lines here.Meanwhile, seven patients were on Monday discharged from the isolation ward of civil hospital, Khanna. Dr Rajinder Gulati, senior medical officer, said, "Six of them were admitted to the isolation ward 10 days back after testing positive for Covid-19. Two of them belong to Kaddon and four to Doraha. These patients were discharged as per the revised discharge policy for the Covid-19 patients." Dr Gulati said all these patients remained asymptomatic with stable vitals during their stay in the isolation ward. “They will now remain in home isolation for seven days and will be visited by rapid response team daily from their respective areas,” he added.The care givers of these patients at home will take hydroxychloroquine tablets as prophylaxis. Attendants of the patients were also counselled at the time of discharge and advised that the patients should strictly follow the advisory for the home isolation. Gulati also said the seventh patient, an accused brought by the police, tested negative two times in a row after remaining in isolation ward for about four weeks. He was finally discharged and handed over to the police. As per the latest status, two accused are admitted to the isolation ward of Khanna civil hospital and their test report is awaited.To date, total 6,027 samples have been collected in the district, out of which 5,580 have tested negative, while reports of 182 are awaited. The total number of patients from Ludhiana is 179, with 88 patients from other districts and states. Seven persons from Ludhiana and five from other districts have lost their lives. In all, 142 patients from district Ludhiana have been discharged so far after treatment.