Two new districts in Covid-19 map, state tally 223
2020-05-18
Ramgarh/Gumla/Hazaribag: Six new cases of Covid-19 were detected on Sunday, of which three are from two districts untouched by the virus so far, taking the state’s total cases to 223. Of the 24 total districts, 17 are now on the coronavirus map with Ramgarh and Lohardaga being the new ones added.

Among the six new cases, two are from Ramgarh and one each from Lohardaga, Deoghar, Hazaribag and Ranchi. Five of them are migrants who have returned from different red zones of the country and the last one is a pregnant woman, who was found positive detected during random testing. The state has now 107 active cases while 114 have recovered. Two persons had died of the infection. 

Talking to TOI, Ramgarh DC Sandeep Singh said, “Two migrants who had returned from Mumbai on Sunday tested positive and it is the first case of Covid-19 in the district. The duo are residents of Patratu and Mandu blocks. We have shifted them to our Covid-19 hospital in Ramgarh for treatment.”

In Lohardaga, an 18-year-old migrant, a resident of Lohardaga sadar area who had returned from Kolkata in West Bengal, tested positive.

Lohardaga DC Akanchha Ranjan said, “One sample has tested positive. The person had come from Kolkata and was lodged in institutional quarantine centre here after his samples were sent for testing.”

In Ranchi, a pregnant woman was found positive during the government’s random screening program of pregnant women. Ranchi SDM Lokesh Mishra said, “A 26-year old pregnant woman whose sample was collected during the screening programme tested positive on Sunday. The woman has been shifted to the Covid ward in Rims for further treatment.”

In Hazaribag, a 50-year-old resident of Gurhait village under Hazaribag sadar block, tested positive. “The man who tested positive on Sunday came from Mumbai a week ago in his own vehicle and was at the Barkagaon quarantine centre since then. He is now being shifted to the Covid hospital in Hazaribag,” Hazaribag DC Bhuvnesh Prasad Singh said.

(With inputs from Gaurav Pandey in Ranchi)


