Two booked for violating home quarantine norms
2020-03-17
Kozhikode: Perambra police on Monday registered a case against two persons for violating the directives issued by the health department regarding self-quarantine to prevent the spread of Covid-19. Both the accused were directed to stay in home quarantine for 28 days as they had returned from foreign countries recently. 

According to Perambra police, one of the persons hails from Koothali and the other from Perambra. As per the information, one of them reached Kozhikode from Saudi on March 5. He was directed to remain in isolation for 28 days. But he violated the directive and visited the nearby market and interacted freely with others.

In the second incident, a resident of Perambra reached Kozhikode from Qatar on March 5. On Monday, he reached Perambra bus stand and visited a relative, violating the directives of health department.

Both have been charged under sections 269 of IPC for negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life and under section 118 E of Kerala Police Act (Penalty for causing grave violation of public order or danger). The action was taken jointly by the police and health department.

“We came to know about the serious lapse on their part when we were conducting an awareness programme at Perambra town on Monday,” said Perambra station house officer K K Biju. 

Police have served notice to one of them. “We could not meet the second person and notice will be served the next day. They have been directed to remain in house quarantine for 28 days,” he added.

In another incident, officials with drugs control department seized poor quality hand sanitizers sold at a medical store at Chinthavalappu in the city. The officials also booked the owner of the pharmacy. 

Meanwhile, Kerala state human rights commission issued a directive to the district police and the drugs control department to ensure action against a wholesale drug dealer who allegedly purchased large number of masks and exported to foreign countries to amass money. 


