Two persons arrested for spreading rumours on Covid-19
2020-03-17
Jaipur/Jaisalmer: Rajasthan police have arrested two persons in two days for spreading rumours on Covid-19 on social media. One Anil Tank, posted as a senior treatment supervisor at Revised National TB Control Programme (RNTCP) Tuberculosis (TB) clinic in Dausa on contract basis, was arrested for allegedly spreading rumour on Covid-19. 

“An FIR has been registered against him under Section 505 of IPC (statements condutcing to public mischief). Investigations are on to find out the source of the message,” Avichal Chaturvedi, district collector, Dausa told TOI.

According to the chief medical health officer Dausa Dr PM Meena, the accused had posted a message on an online social networking group, mentioning that “Eight persons tested positive for Covid-19 in Bandikui of Dausa, special ward created”. Dr Meena said that his services have been terminated. 

On March 12, governor Kalraj Mishra had issued regulation regarding Covid-19 declaring it as epidemic disease in the state. One of the provisions of the regulation was devised to prevent spread of fake news on Covid-19. “No person/institution/ organisation will use any print, electronic or social medical for information regarding Covid-19 without prior permission of medical and health department, Rajasthan. This is to avoid spread of any rumour or unauthenticated information regarding Covid-19. In case, anyone found indulging in such activity, it will be treated as punishable offence under these regulations,” says the regulations on Covid-19. 

Not only in Jaipur, but also in Jaisalmer, one person was arrested for spreading fake message on Covid-19. One person has been arrested under Mohangarh police station area in Jaisalmer for allegedly spreading rumours and fake news about coronavirus on social media. 

District collector Namit Mehta has issued an advisory not to put any message or news of coronavirus without confirming it and strict action will be taken against people spreading rumours and making message viral on social media.

Jaisalmer superintendent of police Kiran Kung said that on Saturday night a person was spreading with fake message about five persons of Jaisalmer testing positive for Covid-19. The arrested person has been identified as Bhom Singh, resident of Odhania under Lathi police station. Lathi station house officer, Om Prakash Choudhary was directed to arrest the person. 


