Two succumb to Covid, 42 test positive in nine west UP districts
2020-05-21
Meerut/Agra/Pilibhit: Two people succumbed to novel coronavirus in Meerut and Agra districts and at least 42 tested positive in nine western Uttar Pradesh districts.

The death of a 38-year-old man took the Covid death tally in Meerut to 21 late on Tuesday night. Meanwhile, four people tested positive in Muzaffarnagar, three each in Meerut and Bijnor and one in Hapur. With the fresh cases, the tally reached 349 (including one found in Kanpur) in Meerut, 32 in Muzaffarnagar,61 (including three found in Kanpur) in Bijnor and 88 in Hapur (as one person who had tested positive at a private lab on Tuesday turned out to be negative on Wednesday). “A 38-year-old Covid-19 positive person from Shakur Nagar in Meerut died late on Tuesday night, taking the death toll to 21. He was diabetic and had hypertension,” said Dr Raj Kumar, Meerut chief medical officer (CMO).

Meanwhile, a Covid-19 positive patient from Etah, who was undergoing treatment at a private hospital, died on Wednesday morning, taking the Covid death toll in Agra district to 29. The patient had complained about the breathing problem and was on the ventilator. Besides, at least eight new Covid positive cases surfaced in Agra till Wednesday evening, taking the district tally to 830. The new cases include two women who delivered two children at Lady Lyall hospital and a one-year-old child. The remaining patients are the contacts of the people who have already been tested positive.

At least 15 fresh cases of novel coronavirus were reported from Mathura, Mainpuri and Aligarh districts on Wednesday. While six of a family in Mathura tested positive for the disease, six migrant workers who had returned from other states, including Gujarat and Maharashtra, were also found to be infected. Meanwhile, three fresh cases were reported in Aligarh. The new patients took the tally of positive cases to 57 in Mathura, 26 in Mainpuri and 103 in Aligarh.

With eight more people testing positive for Covid-19, the tally in Pilibhit district, which was declared corona-free last month, reached 28. Health officials had sent the samples of as many as 29 people to Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI) on May 15, of which eight — all migrants — were tested positive.

Meanwhile, 20 Covid patients were discharged in Agra on Wednesday. Out of the 830 cases reported in Agra district, 79.42% have been declared cured and discharged. On Wednesday, the number of active Covid cases dropped to 143 in the district.


