Uddhav Thackeray says this is lockdown, not lockup, promises state will take care of migrants
2020-04-15
MUMBAI: Hours after migrant workers landed up at Bandra in large numbers, chief minister Uddhav Thackeray appealed to them to stay put and promised that the state would take care of them. 

“This is a lockdown and not a lockup. Even if you don’t belong to this state and are stuck here, we will take care of you. You are a Hindustani and there is no need for anyone to create panic,” said Thackeray in Hindi in his address. He said there were some rumours that trains have started which caused crowds to gather outside Bandra railway station. 

Union home minister Amit Shah called Thackeray and expressed concern regarding the incident. Shah reportedly said the administration should be alert to avoid such incidents as these can weaken the fight against coronavirus. 

Thackeray said he was talking to the Centre regarding the issues of migrants stuck in the state. “Once the lockdown is relaxed, we will make arrangements for you to return home. Until then, we appeal to you to cooperate,” said Thackeray. 

The CM also warned people against trying to politicize the issue and give it a communal colour. 

“Any such attempt will not be tolerated in this state,” said Thackeray, adding there are six lakh migrants in relief camps in the state who are given breakfast and two meals every day. 

Meanwhile, home minister Anil Deshmukh said the state has ordered an investigation into the rumour that trains would restart. Those found guilty of sparking such rumours will be dealt severely, he said.

Cabinet minister Aaditya Thackeray said the day trains were to be shut, the state had requested the Centre to run services for 24 hours more so that migrant labourers could return home. He further said the Bandra incident and even the one in Surat was a result of the Union government “not being able to take a call on arranging a way back home” for migrant labourers. They don’t want food or shelter, they want to return home, said Aaditya. 

“A mutual road map set by Union Govt will largely help migrant labour to reach home from one state to another safely and efficiently. Time and again this issue has been raised with the Centre,” Aaditya tweeted. 


