Coronavirus: UK doctors from Kolkata feel helpless, unprepared
2020-04-14
KOLKATA: There’s been an overwhelming sense of dread among the Bengali doctors in UK’s state-funded National Health Service (NHS) these days. They feel “helpless and unprepared” as the number of Covid-19 deaths continues to go up. “But we are all here, fighting till our last breath” was the common response from the Kolkata-trained frontline workers in the NHS.


Most of the medics TOI spoke to are experienced professionals, either working as full-time consultants or locum (temporary) doctors, who have served the NHS for more than 25 years. Raja Biswas, a consultant physician at the Royal Glamorgan Hospital in Llantrisant, said, “Never in my medical career in the NHS have I felt so unprepared. I am not sure whether NHS can handle this anymore.” Essentials like masks and gowns are in short supply. So are ventilators. The feeling of things going out of hand was echoed by another Kolkata-born doctor, Parijat Bhattacharjee of the London Northwest Hospitals. 

 


“UK’s death toll reached just shy of 10,000 on Saturday. More than 30 NHS workers have died after contracting the new strain of coronavirus. Britons are being urged to stay home on Easter Sunday to curb the spread,” he said.

The 50-something Biswas who had graduated from Calcutta National Medical College in 1990 and is now attached to this hospital near Cardiff in South Wales rued: “It’s quite frustrating, dealing with so many Covid-19 cases. Feeling swamped by this gigantic wave of disease.” The problem, the doctors said, was that health care workers are increasingly self-isolating themselves when they test a positive patient or come in contact with his or her family member has coronavirus. 

With nearly 10,000 doctor vacancies and 43,000 nurse vacancies in the NHS in England, the health service provider is already understaffed. “Volunteers are chipping in, but NHS is already stretched because it has too few intensive care beds and the GP surgeries are struggling to meet patient demand,” said Nabarun Sengupta, who is in the frontline working incessantly. 

