U’khand Covid-19 cases cross 100 after highest 1-day jump
2020-05-20
Dehradun: In the highest single-day jump so far, 15 new Covid-19 positive patients were found in Uttarakhand on Tuesday, taking the total count of cases to 111 in the state. 

Chamoli and Bageshwar districts, both in green zone, reported their first coronavirus case on the day. According to the health department, one case was reported from Chamoli, two cases each were found in Bageshwar and Pauri Garhwal districts, seven cases in Nainital, and the remaining three positive cases were detected from Udham Singh Nagar.

“The virology lab at Srinagar Medical College confirmed that a 32-year-old man from Gairsain tested Covid-19-positive. Similarly, a 19-year-old youth and 25-year-old man from Pauri also tested positive. Both the cases had a travelling history to New Delhi and National Capital Region (NCR),” said additional secretary (health) Yugal Kishore Pant.

In Bageshwar, two men (a 20-year-old and another 35-year-old) tested positive for the virus. Both had returned to the state recently. In Nainital, the seven new patients are aged between 14 years and 50 years, officials said.

“In Udham Singh Nagar, a 19-year-old woman and a 13-year-old boy tested positive on Tuesday. They both had come in contact with their cousin brother who tested positive for the virus on May 15 and had returned from Gurgaon. The third case is of a 46-year-old migrant worker who returned to the state from Mumbai,” said Dr Shailja Bhatt, chief medical officer of US Nagar.

With cases crossing the 100 mark, the state’s recovery rate has now dropped to 48%. The total number of active cases in the state is 57 at present.

Meanwhile, the health department said that the next update in the orange and green zones that were decided by the government on May 18 will be made on May 25. The department, on Tuesday, collected 792 samples and had received reports of 415 cases by 3 pm. The reports of 1,456 samples were awaited at the time of filing this report.

In yet another significant development related to Covid-19, Government Doon Medical College and Hospital (GDMCH) started pool testing of samples on Tuesday. According to health department, Dr Susheela Tiwari Medical College in Haldwani would also start pool testing from Wednesday and both labs are expected to test 1,500 samples everyday with this technique.


