U’khand makes provision for 6 months’ jail term for flouting Covid-19 norms
2020-06-14
Dehradun: Governor Baby Rani Maurya has given assent to the Uttarakhand Epidemic Diseases (Amendment) Ordinance 2020 to amend the Epidemic Diseases Act of 1897. After Kerala and Odisha, Uttarakhand has become the third state in the country to give assent to the amendment ordinance.

With amendments in two provisions, those flouting Covid-19 norms in the state can now be sent to jail for up to six months or (and) be fined Rs 5,000.

On March 14 this year, the Uttarakhand government had declared Coronavirus outbreak as an epidemic in the Himalayan state. Following this, the state government brought the Uttarakhand Epidemic Diseases (Amendment) Ordinance 2020 to make amendments to the Epidemic Diseases Act of 1897.

The amendments were made in sections 2 and 3 of the Act to give the state the power to impose a fine or arrest a person for not wearing a face mask, not maintaining social distancing, flouting quarantine norms, and other such violations of Covid-19 guidelines.

Sources said that the imprisonment provision — for a term of one month to six months — has been included in the Act under section 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant) of the Indian Penal Code.

Meanwhile, two more Covid-19 patients died on the day taking the total toll of the virus to 23 in the state. Additional secretary (health) Yugal Kishore Pant informed that one of the deceased was a Covid-19 positive patient from Udham Singh Nagar. “A 46-year-old man was found dead during screening at Kotdwar check post. His samples tested positive on Saturday,” said Pant. 

Also, 61 fresh cases of Covid-19 were reported in Uttarakhand on Saturday, taking the state tally to 1,785. Among the new cases, 23 were reported from Tehri district. With this, the count of Covid-19 cases in the district has shot up to 281, the highest among all the hill districts in the state. Dehradun recorded 12 new cases, followed by nine cases in Pauri, four each in Haridwar and Uttarkashi, three in Chamoli, and one in Rudraprayag. 

In some good news for the state, 130 cases recovered on the day, taking the total count of recovered cases in the state to 1,077.


