U’khand proposes to extend lockdown till April 30
2020-04-11
Dehradun: In a meeting chaired by chief minister Trivendra Singh Rawat along with senior bureaucrats and police officers on Friday, the government proposed to extend the lockdown in the state till April 30. The proposal is being forwarded to the Centre for final clearance, government sources said.

The proposal, a copy of which is with TOI, mentions that section 144 of CrPC will remain imposed in the state till April 30 and no gathering of people above five will be allowed.

Though strict lockdown has been proposed for the entire state till April 30, the government may give certain relaxations to districts without a single Covid-19 case in the past fortnight (these districts have been marked as ‘category A’).

Districts that have reported Covid-19 cases recently will be placed in ‘category B’ and hotspots identified in such districts will continue to see ban on movement and the local administration will continue the delivery of essential commodities in these areas.

Strict enforcement of social distancing policy will be enforced up to May 31, the proposal adds specifying that no movement between India and Nepal as well as no interstate movement will be permitted till April 30 by any mode.

“No inter-district or intra-district movement, except cargo, will be permitted in category B districts while in category A areas, permission for inter-district or intra-district movement can be considered by respective district magistrates. However, industrial, construction and mining activity will be permitted in all districts of state except Covid-19 hotspots. This would only be allowed after the DM reviews the prevalent health scenario and risks involved in the task,” states the proposal prepared by Uttarakhand government which will be shared with the Centre for approval on Saturday.

For construction or other related activities, the concerned authorities will have to take NOC from the DM in which they have to elaborate the safety measures being taken by them along with assurance of maintaining social distancing and hygiene. The employers have to give undertaking that no person serving a quarantine period will be involved in the construction activity. Any failure regarding the same would invite strict action, the proposal says.

Stamp and registration activity would be permitted in the state in regulated manner with strict adherence to social distancing and electronic transfer of stamp purchase and payments. 

Vehicles with only one person will be allowed to ply in category A districts between 7 am to 1 pm. And if any Covid-19 case emerges in category A district later, the lockdown will be strictly enforced. MGNREGS works will be permitted in all category A districts provided social distance and hygiene guidelines are followed, the proposal says.

Meanwhile, no new case of Covid-19 was reported in the state in the past 48 hours. Among the total 35 reported cases, five have recovered while 30 are admitted to hospitals where their condition is reported to be stable.


