U’khand govt postpones 3rd anniversary celebrations in view of coronavirus threat
2020-03-14
Dehradun: The state government on Friday announced that it is postponing the state-wide celebrations that it had planned for March 18 when the Trivendra Rawat government would be completing three years in office. A letter in this context, written by chief secretary Utpal Kumar Singh, was forwarded to all the district magistrates on late Friday evening. Although no fresh date was announced, sources said that the celebrations may now take place sometime in April. 

The ruling Bharatiya Janata Party had chalked out a detailed programme for the celebrations — ‘Vikas ke teen saal: Baatien kam kaam zyada — encompassing all the 13 districts of the state. Publlic meetings in 70 constituencies either by the elected party MLA or a senior leader, and direct telecast of chief minister Trivendra Singh Rawat’s speech in all the constituencies were to be a part of the celebrations. However, in wake of the coronavirus scare, all this has now been put on hold. 

Speaking to TOI, BJP chief spokesperson Munna Singh Chauhan said, “The entire country is united in its efforts against coronavirus and keeping the fact in mind, the government has decided to avoid having large public gatherings. Therefore, the celebrations have been postponed for some time.” 

Earlier, the state government had postponed its adventure summit which was to be held at Ramnagar from March 20 and a welllness summit, which was to be held in early part of April. 

Meanwhile, addressing mediapersons in Dehradun on Friday, CM Trivendra Rawat said that “special monitoring is being done at the border areas of the state and if required, the borders can also be sealed.” Elaborating further, he said that there were eight India-Nepal border posts — at Banbasa and Tanakpur in Champawat district, Dharchula, Baluakot, Jauljibi, Jhulaghat and Dyura in Pithoragarh district, and Khatima in Udham Singh Nagar district. “The screening of 22,968 people have been done at these eight border posts and not a single case of coronavirus has been detected. At each check point, we have put in place medical teams who are equipped with infrared thermometers for scanning,” he added. 

‘526 quarantined in state, no Covid-19 positive case so far’

The screening of over 60,000 people has been done in the state so far, of which 41,405 people have been screened at airports of Dehradun, Pantnagar and Pithoragarh and no coronavirus positive case was found, CM Rawat said on Friday. He added that 526 people have been quarantined for showing some symptoms of the disease, out of which 351 people have completed a 28 day period of being under observation. “Of the remaining 175, 174 were under observation at home and one was under observation in hospital. Till date, the samples of 17 people — who have been kept under observation in isolation wards — have been collected. Of these, 12 have tested negative while the reports of the rest five are awaited,” the CM added. 


