Uttarakhand Congress vice president home quarantined after he visits hospital
2020-03-18
DEHRADUN: Uttarakhand Congress vice-president Suryakant Dhasmana was on Tuesday home quarantined after he visited isolation ward of Doon Hospital to meet Covid-19 positive patient.


The health department is also looking for a journalist who has allegedly accompanied the Congress V-P to the isolation ward.

In a two-minute-long video, that went viral on Monday, Congress V-P was seen speaking with two Covid-19 suspected students kept in quarantine at Doon hospital. He was also seen entering the isolation ward where coronavirus positive IFS trainee is admitted.

Chief medical officer (CMO) Dr Meenakshi Joshi confirmed that Dhasmana was home quarantined as he went to the isolation ward at the Doon Hospital on Monday.

“No one is allowed to visit the patient inside the isolation ward. There are strict government guidelines regarding the same. Dhasmana has been advised to remain in isolation for 14 days. Even his family members are vulnerable so, they should maintain minimum social contact,” the CMO said, adding that some journalists had also accompanied the Congress VP inside the isolation ward.

She added, “We request those journalists to get in touch with us and the health department will help them. The chances of them getting infected cannot be neglected and if that would happen, they will risk the lives of their family members and many others.”

Meanwhile, speaking to TOI, Dhasmana said that the purpose of his visit was to review the preparation of the health department to tackle Covid-19 cases. He also claimed that he entered the quarantine ward with N-95 mask and had taken all necessary precautions that are prescribed to avoid getting in contact of the deadly virus.

“No one told me that I shouldn’t enter the isolation ward. There were no guards, no banners and no posters in the hospital to guide visitors or even patients. Also, how can I, being a leader, leave the people to die? So, I felt it was my responsibility to meet the IFS trainee. Also, I didn’t go close to him,” he said, adding that he is ready to take all precautions advised by the CMO who has briefed him on how to stay in isolation at home. 

