Uttarakhand health dept issues alert against coronavirus
2020-01-28
DEHRADUN: The state health department has issued an alert and advisory against Novel Coronavirus (nCoV), a cousin of the SARS virus, which has infected thousands of people in China since last month. With the state sharing land borders with China and Nepal, the health department has issued separate alert to border districts and extra ambulance and staff were deployed in local health centres as a precautionary measure.

Director General (DG) health, Dr Amita Upreti, while briefing the media on Monday regarding the preparations of nCoV, said that though cases of the virus attack have been reported in Thailand, Japan and South Korea, “since China is our neighbouring country, India is taking all precautions from the same”. The health department has also ordered all the government hospitals to monitor every suspected case of the deadly virus and send daily reports to the concerned heads.

“The integrated disease surveillance machinery has been put on alert as a usual readiness measure. Any suspected case would be taken straight to the isolation wards to be set up at government hospitals,” she said, adding that the common signs of infection include respiratory symptoms, fever, cough, shortness of breath and breathing difficulties. In more severe cases, infection can cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome, kidney failure and even death.

“We will also be creating awareness among the masses regarding the same and to alert people that one should not take the above mentioned symptoms lightly,” said DG health, adding that advisories have also been issued to Jolly Grant and Pant Nagar airports to ensure that if anyone is entering the state from countries or areas where the virus attack is prevailing, they should inform the health department and conduct proper health screening.

A WHO note on nCoV states, “Coronaviruses (CoV) are a large family of viruses that cause illness ranging from the common cold to more severe diseases such as Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS-CoV) and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS-CoV). A novel coronavirus (nCoV) is a new strain that has not been previously identified in humans.” Coronaviruses are zoonotic which means they are transmitted between animals and people. Detailed investigations found that SARS-CoV was transmitted from civet cats to humans and MERS-CoV from dromedary camels to humans. Several known coronaviruses are circulating in animals but have not yet infected humans.


