U’khand minister may face charges if quarantine violation allegations found true, says HC
2020-06-06
Nainital: The Uttarakhand high court (HC) while issuing notices to state tourism minister Satpal Maharaj as well as Centre, state government, Dehradun DM and SSP said if allegations that Maharaj took part in the cabinet meetings despite a notice being affixed on his house mandating a 14-day quarantine are true, then it is "prima facie satisfied that section 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant) of the Indian Penal Code may be attracted against him".

The observation from the bench of Chief Justice Ramesh Ranganathan and Justice Ramesh Chandra Khulbe came while it was hearing a public interest litigation (PIL) that alleged that a notice was affixed on Maharaj’s house on May 20 directing people living in the house to remain in quarantine for 14 days for security reasons. However, Maharaj still participated in two cabinet meetings held on May 21 and May 29.

The petition added that despite the fact that his wife had tested positive for Covid-19, Maharaj did not inform anyone and took part in the meeting which was attended by the chief minister, other cabinet ministers and several secretaries.

The petitioners have argued that for similar violations, police in Haridwar and Uttarkashi have booked people under section 188 and 307 (attempt to murder) of the IPC and therefore the law should apply equally to all, including the cabinet ministers. “While we see no reason, as at present, to express any opinion regarding the application of Section 307 IPC, we are satisfied, prima facie, that, if the allegations in the Writ Petition are true, then the ingredients of Section 188 IPC may well be attracted,” read the court order.

The court added that it needs to be ascertained why different standards have been adopted for the common people and those holding constitutional offices when they indulge in violation of home quarantine law.

Though the chief standing counsel appearing for the government said that Maharaj was not found Covid positive when the notice was affixed on his house but it was his wife, and there is a possibility that he wasn’t present in the house at the time, the court said that this fact can only be verified when he is put on notice and Maharaj files his counter-affidavit.

“While the learned Chief Standing Counsel states that it is possible that the fourth respondent (Maharaj) may not have resided in that house during the lockdown period, these facts can only be ascertained when the fourth respondent is put on notice, and his filing a counter-affidavit presenting his version of these incidents,” the bench said.

The court has directed all the respondents to reply within three weeks when the case will be heard next.


