U’khand forms committee to analyse effects of Covid-19, suggest measures to improve economy
2020-04-16
Dehradun: With the lockdown being extended till May 3, the state government has started its preparation to handle the economic as well as the social fallout. A state cabinet meeting has been called on Thursday to review the situation and finalise locations and sectors where relaxation can be provided from April 20. 

The government has formed a high-powered committee to analyse the present scenario and recommend the necessary remedies to bring the economy back on track. Besides, it has hinted at the possibilities of opening of construction sites in the state and further relaxations in the nine hill districts, where coronavirus has made virtually no impact. 

In addition, a three month advance pension has been provided to beneficiaries of the old age, widow, farmers and physically challenged pension scheme.

There are around 7 lakh beneficiaries of the pension being provided by the social welfare department for widow, old age persons, farmers and physically challenged people. 

“From April, we are transferring three months of advance pension in their account, so that they do not face problems. The process has been started and soon the amount would reach all the beneficaries,” said CM Rawat. 

 Meanwhile, retired IAS officer Indu Kumar Pandey will head the high-powered committee which will also have principal secretary industry Manisha Panwar, secretary finance Sowjanya, additional secretary finance Bhupesh Tiwari and additional secretary planning Yogendra Yadav. 

After gauging the situation, the committee will suggest measures to strength the financial institutions in the state. It will also identify the high priority areas, which can provide maximum and earliest solution to the issues faced by the common man.

For the present crisis, Uttarakhand has been divided into two categories of Green and Red. Green category has districts which do not have coronavirus-positive cases and others have been included under Red category. While nine districts have virtually no impact of coronavirus, the remaining four – Dehradun, Haridwar, Udham Singh Nagar and Nainital – have been included in the Red category list. 


