U’khand HC directs state and Centre to explore possibilities of testing migrants before they enter state
2020-05-14
Nainital: Pointing out that thermal screening is not enough to check the spread of Covid-19, Uttarakhand high court (HC) on Wednesday asked the Centre as well as the state government to inform whether antigen or any other test can be performed on migrants returning to the state.

The HC also ordered the state government to provide all facilities such as food, shelter and medicines to migrant workers living in 49 shelters across the state while also saying that the people who want to leave Uttarakhand should be provided free transport and passage.

The directions came from the bench of Justice Sudhanshu Dhulia and Justice Ravindra Maithani while hearing a public interest litigation (PIL) which highlighted the plight of migrant workers living in Uttarakhand as well as the people of the state stuck elsewhere who want to come back.

On Tuesday – while hearing the same PIL -- the court had held that though migrants have the right to move freely but “in these strange and difficult times, reasonable restrictions must be imposed…” The court had also explained the rationale for conducting tests before allowing people to enter by saying that it was both for their own safety and of the people living in the state. “We make it very clear that those who wish to come to Uttarakhand cannot be shown the shutters. It is their right to move freely anywhere. Yet in these strange and difficult times, reasonable restrictions must be imposed, for the safety of those who enter Uttarakhand as well as for the safety of those presently residing in Uttarakhand.”

On Wednesday, the court said that it is seeking a “definite reply” from both the Centre and the state government on the possibility “whether antigen tests, or any other rapid test, can be performed on such persons because even interior areas such as Uttarkashi and Almora are reporting Covid-19 positive cases.” 

The court further directed the District Legal Services Authorities to “co-ordinate and co-operate” with the district administration for management of rehabilitation centres by their para-legal volunteers.

The bench which was hearing the case through video conferencing has given both the Centre and the state two days to file their replies. The court added that since difficulties are being faced in holding the court through video conferencing, the next hearing will be held in an open court at the HC premises.


