UK’s health minister contracts coronavirus
2020-03-11
LONDON: A senior health minister who is a key figure in the response to the coronavirus crisis in Britain has tested positive for the disease.


Conservative MP Nadine Dorries is self-isolating after becoming the first MP to test positive for the virus. The parliamentary under-secretary of state for health and social care fell ill last friday, when ironically, she was signing a statutory instrument in relation to coronavirus. She took the test on Monday and revealed the results on Tuesday saying: “I can confirm I have tested positive for coronavirus. As soon as I was informed I took all advised precautions and have been self-isolating at home. Public Health England (PHE) has started detailed contact tracing and the department and my parliamentary office are closely following their advice."

The health secretary Matt Hancock tweeted: “Really sorry to hear Nadine has tested positive for coronavirus. She has done the right thing by self isolating at home, and both NHS and PHE staff have been brilliant. We all wish her well as she recovers.”

Dorries, a senior health minister who helped draw up the legislation to tackle the illness, has mixed with hundreds of MPs in Parliament and civil servants in the past week.


Coronavirus outbreak: Complete coverage

Officials are now trying to identify all those with whom she has been in contact, meaning a whole host of people at the heart of the British government may have to self isolate.

She also met 50 members of the public at a constituency surgery over the weekend and on Thursday night was at a reception in Downing Street for International Women’s Day with UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson.

The 62-year-old tweeted late Tuesday: “Thanks for so many good wishes. It’s been pretty rubbish but I hope I’m over the worst of it now. More worried about my 84yo (sic) mum who is staying with me and began with the cough today. She is being tested tomorrow. Keep safe and keep washing those hands, everyone.”


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

She is not the first health minister in the world to contract the virus. On 25 February, Iran's deputy health minister, Iraj Harirchi, said he had contracted coronavirus and placed himself in isolation, a day after appearing feverish at a press conference.

By Tuesday evening the number of confirmed cases in Britain had risen to 382. The UK is expecting a sharp peak in cases in the coming weeks.

Deputy chief medical officer for England Dr Jenny Harries said she expected significant increases in the number of cases in the UK beginning in about 10 to 14 days time at which time anyone with flu-like symptoms would be asked to self-isolate.

The number of cases in Italy rocketed from hundreds to thousands in just a few weeks and Britain is expected to follow the same pattern. Hand sanitisers, liquid hand wash and toilet paper are virtually sold out across Britain with shelves lying empty as people panic buy and stockpile. Many general practitioners and hospitals are reporting these items are now being stolen from their premises. In one incident a hand sanitiser dispenser was ripped off the wall from a cancer ward at Northampton General Hospital and hospital staff are reporting they are also stolen from the end of patients’ beds.

Some arcade owners in Britain have removed soft toys and are stocking grabber machines with toilet paper and sanitiser. Ho Barts Amusement Arcade in Devon has replaced Frozen and Peter Rabbit teddy bears with hand sanitiser and toilet rolls, whilst East Yorkshire arcade Bridlington's Chapmans Funland has filled its toy grabber machine with toilet rolls.

