Uncertainty of lockdown, food supplies forces 2nd wave of exodus
2020-04-29
Nagpur: Once again, scores of migrant labourers can be spotted walking on the highways. After the numbers receded on strict enforcement of the lockdown, a second wave of workers is now walking back home. Fears that the lockdown may extend beyond May 3 was the major reason for the second exodus, said workers whom TOI spoke to.

Their contractors, who were providing rations till now, have also backed off, and the government supplies were irregular, said workers. They claimed that as they moved in trucks, there was hardly any restriction by police in the states they crossed.

Majority of the labourers are coming from Hyderabad in Telangana, and going to districts like Balaghat and Seoni in neighbouring Madhya Pradesh, and also further to Uttar Pradesh.

Records maintained by the district administration in Balaghat say over 5,400 new admissions came into quarantine centres in a week. These were mainly workers entering Madhya Pradesh through Nagpur, having started their journey in Hyderabad, a source said. A week ago, there were 2,400 inmates in the centres, the figure has now touched 7,834 said the official.

In Seoni district, 1,900 came during the last 4-5 days. However, a larger number of people crossed Seoni to go further on to Uttar Pradesh, said collector Praveen Singh.

“The workers gave feedback that they are scared that the lockdown may be further extended. Even as they complained of lack of food, this may not be the exact reason. Many said they preferred to reach home and fend for themselves rather than live on charity in a distant city,” said Singh.

Workers also claimed food packets were not reaching them regularly and there was always uncertainty over the next meal. A larger number of workers are passing through the district to reach Uttar Pradesh, said the officer.

Nitin Bhandarkar of Nagpur Group of Friends MAA, an NGO, providing aid on the highways said the number of workers spotted on Nagpur-Jabalpur highway has gone up in last 4 to 5 days. Bhandarkar, who put TOI across to some of the workers through a video call, claimed that at least 3,000 must have passed each day in less than a week.

Smita Idare, on her way to Madhya Pradesh with a toddler, said, “There were rumours in Hyderabad that the lockdown may not end soon. Even the municipal supply of food packets was erratic. The contractor too went away, so all of us decided to leave.”

Ravi, on his way to Gondia, said, “The contractor has providing us Rs500 a week, but that was to be adjusted against wages in the coming days. We left before the debt piled up.” Manjari Saunskar, also from Gondia, said, “As it became difficult to sustain in Hyderabad, we thought of heading for our homes.” The workers had covered major distances on trucks as the police were also helping them find rides, said one of them.

In a video shared by Nagpur Group of Friends, a couple with an 11-month-old child was on its way to Kanpur in Uttar Pradesh from Gulbarga in Karnataka.


