Uncertain times for 6-yr-old granddaughter of Covid-19 deceased
2020-04-12
Nagpur: Shahid Khan (name changed) is least worried his own safety from coronavirus. For six days since his throat swab was collected, he is spending sleepless nights at Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) ward worrying what would happen to his six-year-old daughter in case he too tests positive. Khan— son-in-law of city’s first Covid-19 deceased, a 68-year-old man from Satranjipura— and his daughter are among the 43 close contacts now kept in isolation at hospital.The six-year-old has tested negative which means she has to be placed under institutional quarantine. “Doctors are telling me she has to be shifted soon,” a sobbing Khan told TOI.His daughter faces the risk of getting infected in case Khan or any of the other seven relatives in the same ward are positive. The seven include Khan’s elder sister-in-law, her three kids, another woman relative and her two kids.Six family members tested positive on Thursday while another tested positive on Saturday. It included Khan’s wife, daughter and son. Khan was among the first batch of close contacts to be brought at GMCH. The authorities are still tight-lipped about the result of Khan’s samples. On Friday evening, Khan said he had with a heavy heart consented to shift his daughter to MLA Hostel quarantine facility. Two men relatives, who tested negative, have been put up there. “Authorities at MLA Hostel didn’t allow unaccompanied minor to be kept with the men and sent her back,” sources said.Almost the entire family of the Covid-19 deceased has been quarantined. Khan’s three brothers too were taken to Symbiosis Campus at Wathoda on Saturday.He was told keeping his daughter with them too is a risk. Khan’s parents and mother-in-law are no more while his two sisters are outside city and may not be able to host the six-year-old.Social workers have been counseling Khan and trying to find a solution for his daughter in case no one among those awaiting test results is able to take care of her.As a last resort, Khan has given the name of a distant relative of the deceased who lives in Kapsi.There had been some discord among the relatives but when Khan called them up they agreed to look after the six-year-old girl, if needed.“Tragedies have struck us one after another. We couldn’t even mourn the death in family. Soon after, the news of six members testing positive shattered us. I am just praying that among the eight of us at GMCH there is someone to take care of my daughter,” Khan said before breaking down again.