Unchecked entry of migrants may lead to mass spread of Covid-19, worry local administartion
2020-05-05
JAIPUR: A migrant worker from Gujarat who crossed over to Kasba village in Dungarpur without permission has tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday evening, making him the sixth positive case in the tribal district who crossed over from another state without screening.


Officials said the latest person to be tested positive came from Gujarat on April 17. The health workers have asked him to stay put in home isolation for 14 days. He, however, was caught flouting the rules and was sent to the state-run quarantine facility in a school on April 23. His first report on April 24 was negative while his second report on May 3 turned out to be positive.



The entire village has been sealed by police and they have started tracing his contacts. All seven positive cases in Dungarpur have similar travel history.

It has increased the worry of the administration about the mass spread of Covid-19 in bordering districts due to their entry through villages, forests and farmlands. Officially the administration has identified 616 such migrants, while their actual number is very high since April 26.

Sensing the gravity of the situation, the chief medical health officer (CMHO) Mahesh Parmar of Dungarpur has launched a drive by reaching out to villages and convincing the villagers on loudspeakers to report the entry of any migrant in their village.

“Most of these migrants are walking from their host cities and before arriving in their respective villages they are coming in contact of several persons throughout their journey,” said Parmar.

Meanwhile, the Ratanpur checkpoint between Rajasthan and Gujarat continues to be flooded by migrant workers lined up for screening and registration to enter Rajasthan on the eighth consecutive day. Due to the fear of being sent to quarantine facility and to avoid long queues, several people are choosing alternative paths to enter the state.

Krashna Rajsingh, a social worker, said the manner in which migrants are entering in some districts, including Dungarpur, without following proper protocol will result in a disaster in the next 8 to 10 days.

