Patna: Undeterred by coronavirus threat, devotees visit temples for puja
2020-03-18
PATNA: Devotees of Lord Hanuman in the state capital seemed undeterred by the outbreak of Covid-19 as they were seen in significant numbers at the temples here on Tuesday. Though their numbers were less compared to other Tuesdays.


Coronavirus in India live updates

This was in sharp contrast with many famous shrines in the country, including Mumbai's Siddhivinayak Temple and Ujjain’s Baba Mahakal temple, which have been closed. Shirdi Saibaba Temple in Maharashtra was also shut for devotees on Tuesday.

However, in Patna, the famous Mahavir temple near Patna Junction and Durga temple near Patna museum witnessed huge gatherings on Tuesday despite government advisory not to gather at one place in large numbers.

Though many people were seen wearing masks, but the advisory related to social distancing was hardly being followed as people stood very close to each other, ignoring other precautions.

Temple authorities, on the other hand, claimed they have taken several precautionary measures in order to stop the spread of the virus. “The temple premises is being cleaned with water and disinfectants and people as well as shrine management staff are being asked to wash their hands at regular intervals,” said Harikant Prasad, who looks after bookings for rituals at Mahavir Mandir.

Prasad, however, said the number of devotees had reduced substantially over the last few days, but it increased on Tuesday. “Though more devotees came on Tuesday but their number was still less as compared to other Tuesdays in the past,” he said. 

Arvind Pandey, a priest at Khajpura Shiva temple also made similar claims with regard to devotee footfalls. “The number of people coming to the temple has definitely reduced over the past few days. In fact, very few people came to the temple even last Sunday, despite it being a holiday. Though the footfall increased on Tuesday, it was still comparatively lower than Tuesdays in the past,” he said.

Hari Gopal, the priest at Durga Temple near Golghar, said liquid soaps for handwash has been introduced in the shrine and the devotees are asked to wash their hands with it before entering the temple premises. “We have started providing handwash to the devotees as preventive measure to curb the spread of Covid-19. The number of people coming to the temple has plunged but it surged slightly on Tuesday,” he said.

Devotees, on the other hand, claimed that they exercised caution in visiting the temples. Tarun Kumar of Boring Road said: “I used to visit Mahavir Mandir early morning on every Tuesday and Saturday, but this time I went around 10am, so that the number of people could be less. Besides, I avoided touching the steel and wooden surfaces.” 


