Under lockdown, city tries out new hobbies, helps out needy
2020-03-28
Varanasi: While the frontline warriors like medical professionals, sanitary workers, administrative and police personnel are fighting the battle against coronavirus in open during the lockdown, there are many others too in the Varanasi who are utilizing this time in purposeful ventures like making food for those stranded and sharing constructive work to do at home online. 

One of such creative mind is Ankita Khatri, a homemaker who interacted with Prime Minsiter Narendra Modi through video conferencing on March 25. She caught PM’s attention with her creative thought “Jo Rachta hai Wo Bachta hai.” Appreciating her thought, the PM also shared it on his twitter handle saying “An interesting perspective on how young India can take the lead in battling COVID-19”. 

“A creative person can’t sit idle. We need to channelize our creative energy for the benefit of the society in such a critical hour. I am using the #Corona_Crises Days for cooking goodies for family members,” said Ankita appealing to her friend circle to share their creative ideas too. She posts, “Please share how you are spending your quarantine period, use #Kuchh_Creative_Karo_Naa”. “I feel so delighted to see how Ankita took up the issue of protecting from the adverse effect on mental and emotional health during these days of corona crisis,” said her husband Manish Khatri, a creative art professional.

As the temples are closed for the devotees, many of the priests and mahants have come out to do service to the ‘Daridra Narayan’ (the poor) by providing meals to them in this hour of crisis. “We have opened our kitchen to prepare food for the people in need and those trapped in the city due to lockdown,” said mahanth of one of the most crowd pulling temples -Sankat Mochan Temple, Vishwambhar Nath Mishra, who is also a professor of electronics at IIT (BHU). “We distribute food packets at the ghats and other places,” he said adding that it is the grace of god that no one goes empty stomach in this temple town.

His younger brother Prof Vijay Nath Mishra, a neurologist at Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, also devotes his time in providing help to underprivileged apart from discharging his duty. Apart from this, he has also connected himself online with others to play quiz on different topics. 

“I have started online quiz to engage my Facebook friends to shun the anxiety and dullness of the lockdown before going to bed,” said Mishra adding that the activity has received a good response from people, who want to sharpen their general knowledge and IQ in these hours of leisure. Similarly, Dr Subodh Kumar Singh, a noted plastic surgeon who had reconstructed cleft of the lead character of the Academy Award winning documentary ‘Smile Pinki’, is treating patients through telemedicine. “We are serving the needy people who cannot come to the hospital in this hour of crisis. For example, I got a call on Thursday from a 16-year-old girl from a village of Ghazipur district. She sustained second degree burns on her face after hot cooked pulses from cooker fell on her,” he said adding that he advised her proper medication after examining her burns through video call by phone. “It was a great sense of satisfaction for me when I saw that the girl’s parents and family members were convinced,” he said. 

Similarly, volunteers of Vishal Bharat Sansthan, a social organisation, could be seen busy in cooking meal and preparing food packets at Subhash Bhawan in Lamahi, the ancestral village of great author Munshi Premchand. “We have started a kitchen to prepare food for those trapped in different places due to lockdown. The district administration has issued passes to our volunteers for distribution of food packets wherever needed,” said VBS founder and assistant professor at BHU Dr Rajiv Srivastava. Besides, ‘Anaj Bank’ run by the organization has also made arrangements with helpline numbers to supply food to those in need, he said adding that the service would continue until the crisis is over. Similarly, there are several others who are actively discharging their social responsibilities in this hour of crisis. District magistrate Kaushal Raj Sharma, who had earlier appealed to the civil society to come forward to help others, said that people working to help needy would be provided all support. 


