Under home quarantine, son of deceased Covid-19 patient asked to report at SNMC
2020-06-13
Agra: The son of an 83-year-old coronavirus infected patient, whose body was handed over by the SN Medical College (SNMC) staff to the family for cremation in violation of the norms, has been issued a notice to report at the emergency ward at 12 noon on Saturday.

However, all the12 family members of the deceased are under home quarantine and alleged that the SNMC administration is trying to harass them for highlighting their gross negligence in the handling of a Covid-19 patient. 

The notice mentions that “if the recipient fails to report at the emergency ward by Saturday 12 noon than it would be considered that no action is required to be taken in the matter”. 

In violation of the standard protocol, the body of the Covid-19 positive patient was handed over to his family for funeral rites, instead of hospital authorities packing it in a leak-proof bag and taking it for cremation. 

The family was shocked when hours after the man’s cremation, which was attended by 40 people, they got a call from the hospital informing them that he had tested positive for coronavirus. 

Speaking to TOI, Rajesh, son the deceased retired sub-inspector Gajendra Pal Singh, said, “The SNMC administration is harassing me for highlighting the entire matter. Our home quarantine time has been increased from 14 to 21 days. In fact, I am asked to report to the emergency ward to provide details of the matter. So far, only screening has been done. Our samples have not been collected for Covid-19 testing.”

Meanwhile, SNMC principal Dr Sanjay Kala said, “A five-member committee has been constituted to probe the issue . The members of the committee have initiated a probe and called the complainant to record his statement. He can come after completing his home quarantine duration.” 

A resident of Vikas Nagar colony, Singh had complained of severe chest pain and difficulty in breathing on Sunday evening. He was admitted in the emergency ward of SNMC. 

“On Monday, my father’s health deteriorated and was put on a ventilator. A day later, the hospital, which has an in-house facility for Covid-19 testing, told us that he had tested negative,” Rajesh had earlier said.


