Under pressure, Covid-19 survivors retested for virus
2020-04-22
Hyderabad: In a new trend, health authorities in a few districts in the state are carrying out random retests on Covid-19 discharged patients. Though officials tried to pass it off as a precautionary move as some discharged patients tested positive later, it is learnt that the exercise is being taken up following pressure from neighbours of Covid-19 survivors.

Recently, a residential welfare society ( RWS) of an apartment complex at Narsingi approached health authorities seeking retesting of a Covid-19 survivor in their building. The resident had recovered from Covid-19 recently. “The society residents are concerned about reports from South Korea and other countries that a few patients, after testing negative, are displaying Covid-19 symptoms again and tested positive too for the coronavirus. They approached us saying patients should be retested even after they are discharged,” a top health official, requesting anonymity, told TOI.

After that, oral instructions were given to carry out random retesting on recovered patients. “ All discharged patients cannot be tested as testing is a time-consuming process and thousands of samples of suspect cases are yet to be tested,” sources said.

On Wednesday, a Covid-19 survivor self-reported to health authorities in Karimnagar, complaining of a sore throat. The authorities sent him to a government isolation centre. After the patients get discharged, they were being asked to be under home quarantine for 14 days. 

 A few districts have even completed random testing of survivors, all the tests so far came negative. 

In another important development, the medical and health department has given instructions not to conduct Covid 19 tests on those who died with symptoms of the infection. Earlier, authorities used to conduct tests on suspected deaths. Now, individuals who display Covid-19-like symptoms before their death would be treated as coronavirus cases. The government has even constituted a committee on disposal of bodies of Covid -19 patients.

 The health department is even gearing up to collect samples of suspected patients from their homes. Though this system would begin first in GHMC area, it would be extended to other areas depending on feasibility and success.


