Under Covid-19 cover, trees felled in Mhadei forest
2020-05-26
Keri: The Mhadei region of the Western Ghats was given protection in 1999 when it was declared a wildlife sanctuary. But its biodiversity continues to be vulnerable to anthropogenic threats as locals continually defy forest authorities to claim ownership of the protected land. 

More recently, the lockdown, which has resulted in restricted movement of forest staff, has made it easier for villagers to cut trees. 

A wildlifer from Bicholim, Subodh Naik brought to notice the unchecked tree felling going on in Hulan by taking the advantage of the Covid-related lockdown. 

The slopes of the Hulan hill in Caranzol area have been cleared of indigenous trees like madat, kindal, jambo, kumbyo and satvin, sources said. Along with the trees, undergrowth and other vegetation has also been cleared.

Environmentalists said that such illegal activities have been going on unhindered in several areas of Caranzol ever since the checkpost there became non-functional after it was burnt down by some culprits on May 26, 2019. 

The Hulan area they said is a more recent and new target.

Sources alleged that some villagers from Caranzol are behind this and that they used mechanical tree cutters. 

Before the onset of monsoon, villagers clear patches of forest to plant cashew saplings, the source said. 

All of these areas are inside the Mhadei Wildlife Sanctuary, but villagers continue to claim ownership of the land without producing any documents. 

Some villagers have even formed a group and erected a sign board stating ‘No Entry For Forest Officials’. 

“As no final notification has been issued by the Goa government, some villagers are taking benefits and are involved in clearing forests by felling trees and setting fire to the undergrowth. The Hulan hill is known as a tiger habitat and has a rich reptilian diversity. Rampant clearing of forests has already posed threat to the areas’s wildlife,” president of the Animal Rescue Squad Amrut Singh said. 

To prepare the land for the cashew plantation, the area has to be completely cleared of all tree stumps, cut logs, vegetation and undergrowth. For this the villagers set everything on fire, sources said.

“On receiving information about trees being felled and patches of forest areas being set on fire, I have sent forest guards to the spot. We will get detailed information after they return,” range forest officer Vilas Gawas told TOI. 

The additional principal chief conservator of forests, Santosh Kumar said, “Our forest officials will visit the area and investigate the matter and take the needful steps.”


