Coronavirus scare in Chennai: Universities suspend classes, reschedule exams
2020-03-17
CHENNAI: Following the state government order, universities and deemed universities have declared holidays till March 31, and have rescheduled classes and internal assessment tests. Some hostel students were asked to vacate immediately to prevent the spread of Covid-19 among students.


Anna University has sent a circular to all colleges and university departments following the government order. “We will issue directions to close all engineering colleges and university departments. Students will be asked to vacate hostels,” said M K Surappa, vice-chancellor of Anna University.

Engineering colleges don’t have end-semester exams but have internal assessment tests that can be rescheduled, a college principal from Chennai said. “We cannot ask everyone to vacate immediately and will give time to the students,” he said.

The higher education department issued a circular saying university exams, practical exams and entrance exams will be held as scheduled and hostels will remain opened for students writing them. The circular said though holiday has been declared for colleges and universities, faculty and non-teaching staff should be present.

“All colleges and university departments are closed for students. We have sent instructions to the college principals. But the university practical exams will be held as per the schedule,” said P Duraisamy, vice-chancellor of University of Madras.

“Following the state government’s announcement, IIT Madras immediately suspended classes till March 31. We will finalise other details on Tuesday,” institute director Bhaskar Ramamurthi said. Earlier, the institute had postponed mid-semester examinations and relaxed the attendance for lab classes.

SRM Institute of Science and Technology has advanced its summer break and declared holiday till April 30. “There won’t be any loss except for internships. Anyway industries will not take outsiders right now,” said Sandeep Sancheti, vice-chancellor of SRM Institute of Science and Technology.

The university has asked all students in hostels to vacate rooms by March 19. The re-entry to hostels after vacation will be permitted on or after April 30. However, post-graduates of medical and dental courses, interns of nursing, physiotherapy and occupational therapy colleges can stay in hostels.

Some deemed universities outside Chennai have arranged transport facilities for students after declaring holidays. “We have booked state corporation buses to ferry our students to Chennai and have given them packaged food,” said S Vaidhyasubramaniam, vice-chancellor of SASTRA, Thanjavur.


