Universities in West Bengal to hold end-semester exams in a month after lockdown is lifted
2020-05-10
KOLKATA: Universities in Bengal would hold undergraduate and postgraduate end-semester examinations within a month of the lockdown being lifted, education minister Partha Chatterjee said on Saturday after a discussion with vice-chancellors of state varsities.


An official said the terminal exams would be held between June 25 and July 7. “We also plan to hold the second, fourth and eighth semester exams after July 15. All will be tested on the syllabus taught till March 15,” he said. A senior Jadavpur University official said the final semester exams for the engineering faculty would be held in June. “From July 1, our engineering students will have to report to their jobs,” he said.

But exams will, however, not involve traditional question papers and answerscripts in some universities. Universities have been allowed to use their discretion in altering the evaluation pattern and type of questions to fit the changing needs. Some universities, including Maulana Abul Kalam Azad University of Technology, will conduct the exams online. The rest, except Presidency University, will hold the end-semester exams—sixth semester for UG and 10th semester for PG —in batches at home centres. Presidency will not have any practical or written tests. The last-semester evaluation will be replaced with weightage on cumulative grade points average (CGPA) in the earlier semesters, viva voce, project and internal continuous assessment. It also plans to begin classroom studies only when the new session resumes on September 1. 

Presidency, Rabindra Bharati University and JU will not open hostels in a hurry. Calcutta University has sought a month’s notice before reopening the 16 hostels. But RBU VC Sabyasachi Basu Ray Chaudhuri said, “Our priority are the visually impaired students who may be given access to hostels.”

But campuses are set to look different when they reopen. Canteens, union rooms, common rooms and other hangout zones, will be shut temporarily. Universities will be open six days a week. All universities will sanitize classrooms, compounds and hostels. Sanitizer dispensers will be installed, Students, teachers and staff will have to wear masks. Security staff will screen entrants with thermal guns. Universities will have to keep PPE suits ready. Classes will be held in batches to maintain social distancing. 

CU VC Sonali Chakravarti Banerjee held a meeting with registrar and pro-VC on Saturday, when they conveyed the decisions to principals of affiliated colleges. Minister Chatterjee said, “Each university has the autonomy to chalk out a plan to reopen campuses and hold exams. The VCs have to update their decision to higher education secretary Manish Jain.”


