Covid-19: Unknown sources, high numbers in Tamil Nadu raise questions
2020-06-08
CHENNAI: The government has said it has been able to track the source of every Covid-19 positive case in the state and that hence there is no community spread, but experts say the number of cases and their spread show the infection is indeed spreading through the community.

On Sunday, the total number of Covid-19 cases in the state crossed 1,500. Of these, only 18 people came from abroad and other parts of the country. The rest have been classified indigenous cases. And, there is no clarity on whether the precise source of infection for each case has been identified.

Personal accounts show that people who have not stepped out of their homes have contracted the disease as have those who have been in a crowd of railway passengers. But, in both types of infections, there is no clear knowledge about the source of the virus.

The rise in the number of cases especially in crowded localities points to community spread as many of these people have not come in contact with people who have come into the city. The relaxing of some if the lockdown norms has ensured that people have grown confident and are less careful against the infection.

In Chennai, the corporation has stepped up tests and awareness campaigns in crowded slums, but buildings where patients have been identified are yet to be disinfected.

Dr Jayaprakash Muliyil, epidemiologist and former principal of Christian Medical College, Vellore, said community transmission has been established in Tamil Nadu. “There is no doubt about that. Most people who test positive for Covid-19 have no known contacts at all. In Chennai, practically there are cases everywhere. You should wear masks without fail when you step out of houses. You should consider every other person as a potential carrier of the virus, and maintain social distancing.”

In Chennai, though the number of cases is going up, the intensity shown in screening, containing and disinfecting seems to have reduced considerably. The corporation though is trying to step up its work, focusing on crowded areas including tenements. 

A senior government official said an argument is being put forth to emphasise that there is community transmission because Covid cases are widespread in Chennai. “But, it’s a myth. Of 40,000 streets, Covid cases were only on 6,600 streets. We are also able to trace source of infections - stage 2. Rather than enter into a debate on whether community transmission exists, we must focus on protecting people.”

He also said that in all positive cases people have been able to say where they got the virus.


