#Unlockingdiaries: With safety protocols set, city malls will reopen today
2020-06-09
After about two-and-a-half months, the malls in Kochi are all set to re-open today. With thermal screening, hand sanitisers at every shop, frequent disinfection routines and policing to ensure customers wear their masks at all times, the shopping experience is guaranteed to get an overhaul, as we take a look at the various precautions that will be followed from today. 

Shibu Philip, business head of Lulu Mall, says, “Following the norms, we can accommodate about 15,000 people an hour and this number would be constantly tracked. All stores have undergone deep cleaning prior to re-opening.” 

Meanwhile, Joji John, an Oberon Mall official, says, “Malls are a lot safer with all government regulations being followed to the dot, as compared to regular shops where even maintaining social distancing is a challenge. We are expecting around 15,000 people a day.” 



Social distancing alerts

Posters about the need to follow social distancing are placed from escalators and lifts to all corners with crowd potential. In Lulu Mall, stickers marking 1.5m gaps will be up, making it easy for customers to adhere to social distancing. 

Those with flu-like symptoms would be denied entry. The malls will also have their temperatures maintained between 24 to 30 degree Celsius. Staff will also wear face shields at Lulu and there will also be a restriction on customer numbers on escalators and the 1.5 m distance would be followed even at the two-wheeler parking.
 

Contactless payment and disposable crockery
Restaurants will operate at 50% seating capacity. Lulu will try to use e-menu and is also developing an app for its food court, says Shibu. “It will let customers scan a QR code that will let them get a menu card, also let them pay without physically going to the counter,” he says. Meanwhile, Joji says, “In Oberon, we will have disposable menu cards and crockery, and will try our best to avoid cash payment.”
 

Dedicated sanitisation teams 

Regular cleaning of AC units, exhaust fans, other filters and drain lines are being undertaken to ensure dust levels are kept at a minimum in all malls. Sanitisers are also kept on all floors. 

Shibu says, “All common areas in the Lulu mall and all customer touch points are being frequently disinfected by a dedicated sanitisation team. A disinfectant team can be contacted by all retail partners in case they need assistance. We also have a Pandemic Response Team that will ensure all the guidelines are implemented and they will be available 24/7 to handle any crisis. We have also installed sensor-based vehicle tyre disinfection facilities and disinfection mats at entrance.” 

At Oberon, sanitising has been going on for the past three to four weeks, following the standard operating procedures. 
 

Aarogya Setu App
All customers, retailers, staff and vendors need to download the Aarogya Setu app to ensure zero presence from the identified red zones in the malls.


Suspended services during Unlock 1.0: 

The following facilities are unavailable till further notice: 
• Entertainment zones and cinema halls
• Valet Service
• Pram service
• Prayer hall
• Baby care Room
• Baggage and helmet counters
• Smoking area


City malls are busy getting sanitised00:31

