#Unlock Diaries: Bareilly salons adapt to ‘new normal’ guidelines and takes precautions amid corona pandemic
2020-06-10
With India in post-lockdown and unlock phase, salon services in Bareilly have been finally resumed on day-wise basis with strict safety measures in place. We speak to salons and beauty parlours in the city about the ‘unlock’ phase and the guidelines they have adapted to as the ‘new normal’.

 
PROTECTIVE GEAR, TEMP CHECKS, BY-APPOINTMENT SERVICE IN PLACE
Bareilly salons have got protective gears for their teams and also giving them training on how to use these and how to adapt to the ‘new normal’.
 

Siddharth Singh, owner at Geetanjali Studio, Bareilly says, “We have already conducted SOP training for all staff members before opening of the salon. Adapting to the ‘new normal’ and taking care of strict do’s and don’ts, we are doing complete sanitization and deep cleaning of the salon regularly. We have equipped every staff member with personal protective gears. We are regularly conducting temperature checks for all guests as well as staff members, plus we are also reviewing every guest’s travel declaration before taking any service from us. We are not allowing entry of guests without face-masks and following social distancing wherein we have adapted to distancing of service stations and limiting appointments via online-only. For this, we have started online system to send appointment requests directly. Besides, we have made an arrangement for single use items like water bottles, gloves, napkins, service kits, towels, linen, head-bands, etc and their proper disposal.” 
 

 
MAINTAINING HYGIENE AND DISINFECTION PROCEDURES

Tulika Saxena, owner at Looks Salon, Bareilly, says, “As per the measures recommended by Government, we are following protocols and measures to ensure safety of our staff and clients by keeping the highest standards of hygiene and disinfection procedures. We have been recording staff body temperature with contact less thermometer incorporated with health questionnaire which will emphasize on the early stage symptoms to rule out all the possibility of contagion. We are taking temperature of each client to ensure that no potential carrier of virus walk-in to the salon. Services are purely appointment based and during fixing of appointments, our manager is ensuring to enquire about past 14 days history of the client. We are following the social distancing during work by using alternate work station. All the tools, accessories and station are sanitized and disinfected prior beginning of the work and after finishing of the work. Most importantly, all the staff is wearing PPE kit and face shield to ensure safety of our client and their own safety.
 

 
A ‘NEW NORMAL’ FOR BAREILLYWALLAHS

Soumya Srivastava, a resident of Janakpuri says, “Personal grooming has been one of the major hits during 3-months of lockdown and life has come to a halt. Not only the salons but we too have been at the receiving end of the lockdown. But now finally there is some respite as salons have opened up in the city. Be it by way of single-use products, increased sanitation or disposable tools, salons are taking multiple measures post-lockdown to ensure hassle-free experiences for customers. From now, even the customers are aware and cautious about what and how the services have been provided. Masks and sanitizers have become a staple at parlours, and it’s the ‘new normal’.”
 

Prateeksha Agarwal, a resident of Rampur Garden, says, “If we have a cold or flu-like symptoms, salons are straight-away refusing to provide any service, which I believe ensures safety of each one of us. Most importantly, there is no crowding at the salons anymore. Use of single-use items is a great way to establish hygiene as well as defeat the risk of contamination.”

 
Manyaekta.Gugliani@timesgroup.com

