Unlock 1.0: Malls open, but focus on restoring people’s confidence
2020-06-09
JAIPUR: After the state government’s nod on Saturday, malls and restaurants in the state reopened for business on Monday but customers kept away from these establishments on the first day. About 40-50% of outlets in malls resumed operations, while others were busy cleaning and rearranging their stock.

The movement of people in malls mostly consisted of management staff who were checking if the SOPs were in place and customers followed norms. Business was the last thought on the first day of reopening.

“We know it will take time before outlets start receiving customers. Our focus now is to create confidence among visitors and the whole exercise is geared to achieve that,” said Anup Bartariya of World Trade Park (WTP) pointing to thermal checking by a PPE-clad man, entry of cellphone numbers of customers, and disinfecting systems practices.

Similar SOPs and protocols could be seen in other malls also. Owners said that they expect most of the outlets to open in the next few days as they need to stock products and rearrange things. “The closing was chaotic as we had to shut our doors in an emergency. So, we need time to rearrange everything,” said an outlet manager.

At Gaurav Tower, the hustle and bustle of people moving in and out could be seen, indicating early signs of a normalcy. Gaurav Baradiya, owner of the mall said, “We will be back to normalcy if the Covid situation in the city does not deteriorate. Around 50% of the outlets in the mall reopened today and we expect all of them to do so very soon.”

The chat walas, juice bars and other snacks stalls in front of malls also saw very few customers. “By this time (1pm), we would have served 40 people. But, so far, I have not received a single customer,” said a juice bar owner in front of a mall.

But keeping malls operational without adequate business imposes a financial burden. Bartariya said they cannot avoid the running costs and they have to live with the situation.

“We will try to reduce expenses from other heads like marketing and publicity. We will focus more on social media that is less costly,” explained Bartariya.

But Baradiya said that while it is a difficult situation, they expect the businesses will return to near normalcy within a month.

Many said right now the priority is to ensure there are no cases positive cases in malls which will dampen the mood. “We have to take utmost case to ensure that even if there is a Covid case, it does not spread,” said the manager of another mall.


