Unlock 1.0 sees 6 new areas in Jaipur reporting Covid cases
2020-06-14
JAIPUR: With the start of almost ‘normal’ routine in markets and people stepping out of homes to resume work, there has been an increase in the number of places reporting Covid-19 cases. In the past 13 days, the Unlock 1.0 stage, at least six new places in Jaipur have reported positive cases. 


With social distancing and preventive measures that people were supposed to follow having taken a back seat, number of cases have been on the rise. Covid deaths in Jaipur are being reported without break.

In just 13 days, 36 people in Jaipur alone have died, while as many as 76 areas in the city have reported virus cases.

The new areas to have reported Covid-19 cases in the city in Unlock 1.0 phase are Jhalana, Vidhyakpuri, Harmada, Riddhi Siddhi Chauraha, Goner Road and Sikar Road. 

On Saturday, the number of active cases reported from city stood at 402, which was 285 on May 31. The increase in cases in the fisrt 13 days accounts for 20% of the total cases reported from city so far.

Also, as many as 36 deaths reported from the city in June make for 28% of total fatalities reported from Jaipur so far. 

With the number of areas with Covid cases having increased to 76, while some have been reporting sporadic cases, others account for frequent infections. 

On Saturday, 27 new cases were reported from 21 different areas of the city. The 27 areas which reported new cases are Hathroi Fort (4), Jyoti Nagar (2), SMS Hospital (2), while one case each was reported from Sodala, Shastri Nagar, Jobner House, Adarsh Nagar, Jaisinghpura, Barkat Nagar, Brahampuri, Pratap Nagar, Jamwaramgarh, Chandpole, Khonagauriyan, Jyanti Market, Sanjay Nagar Bhatta Basti, Vivek Vihar, SB Vihar Colony, Kishanpole, Mohalla Bilochiyan at Delhi bypass. Areas of two other persons among the infected are not clear. 

Kalicharan Saraf, BJP leader and former health minister, alleged that the Congress party is flouting norms of social distancing. At a time when only 50 guests are allowed in marriages, 200 MLAs have gathered at a hotel, which is quite unfortunate. 

