#UnlockingDiaries: Kolkata goes shopping for change
2020-06-12
From offering attractive discounts to displaying products on video calls, shops are going all out to woo customers ever since they received the government’s nod to reopen from June 8. Coping with losses in the wake of the lockdown as well as Cyclone Amphan, traders are desperate to get business back on track and have implemented safety measures like thermal screening, regular sanitisation, mandatory wearing of masks and social distancing to provide a safe shopping experience. Though the first week saw very few customers, traders are hopeful of a revival what with Durga Puja coming up. CT toured some of the most popular shopping hubs in Kolkata to get a sense of what people are stepping out to buy the most in #Unlock1.0.



Gariahat Market

In demand: Cotton saris, shorts, half-sleeved cotton panjabis, rubber slippers, hair products




“We’ve sold a few printed cotton saris that can be worn at home. Customers are going for affordable options priced below `1,000,” said Disha Roy and Shaswata Paul from a garments shop. Sanjoy Saha of a renowned sari showroom said, “Bengalis love to shop and they missed the chaitra sale. So, we are hopeful they will compensate for that this Puja.” Shop owner Joydeb Nag is offering up to 50% discount on saris. Also in demand are half-sleeved cotton panjabis, kidswear, infantwear, shorts and basic lingerie. “Many women are buying sports bras as they are exercising more in the lockdown,” said a shopkeeper. While there is no demand for cosmetics, many are interested in hair grooming products. Rubber slippers, chappals and running shoes are popular too. “Belts are also selling as people’s weights have been fluctuating in the lockdown,” said another shopkeeper. 



New Market

In demand: Infant wear, comfortable clothes for home, lingerie, cosmetics




“The sale of clothes for newborns is good. Since schools are closed, clothes for children to wear at home are in demand,” said shop owner Sanjoy Motwani. Basic lingerie products are popular but not the fancy ones. “There are orders for shampoos, conditioners, deodorants and other skincare products, but now with malls and restaurants reopening, I’m sure people will buy more grooming products,” said Amartya Shaw from a cosmetics shop. Hitesh Adwani, who sells dress materials, said, “The demand is gradually picking up. Fashion designers are buying dress materials in bulk.” 



Dakshinapan
In demand: Saris, dresses, blouses




“We are getting 2-3 customers a day. But the regulars are buying on video calls and WhatsApp. We deliver their orders by courier,” said Chandoni Basu, owner of a clothing shop. Another shop, which specialises in saris from Andhra Pradesh, is home delivering the orders. “I think it will take months to get the business back to normal. Since we are all government-run shops, we haven’t increased our prices,” said manager Korada Rohini. 



Metro Plaza

In demand: Kidswear, slippers



"There is a steady demand for casual T-shirts and track pants for kids, but no takers for partywear," said shop owner Hemant Asher, who is content despite low sales. "People are mostly coming in for casual slippers. I wouldn't say that the market is good, but it is catching up fast," said Zeeshan Ali, another shop owner. New stocks have started arriving.



AC Market

In demand: Kidswear, homewear, shorts, T-shirts, tank tops, loungewear




“It’s been just four days since the market reopened. There are hardly any customers. So, we are not even thinking of ordering new stocks until the old one is cleared. The few who are coming are mostly looking for general items that can keep you comfortable at home. It will take around 10 days to understand what the demand is like,” said Harish Agarwal, owner of a garments shop for women.



Vardaan Market

In demand: Watch batteries, essentials



"Nearly 70% to 80% of the shops are open, but customers are missing. We have got a few requests for changing watch batteries and repairing of watches. We paid all our staff from our savings as it was necessary to open the shop. I think it will take at least three months to get business back on track,” said Wasim, owner of a watch shop.



