Unlocking temples in Prayagraj
2020-06-07
Prayagraj: With just two days left before places of worship could reopen amid the lockdown, temples in Prayagraj have started making arrangements to ensure that devotees can offer prayers while observing standard precautions in the wake of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic.

These temples could reopen on Monday after being shut for 75 days due to the lockdown.

The district administration, however, have called a meeting with the management of different temples before finalising any guidelines or reaching out to a decision of reopening for these places of worship.

ADM (city) AK Kanojia said, “We have received the guidelines from the state government on Saturday evening and consequently called a meeting with the priests of prominent temples of the city and their management on June 7 (Sunday) following which we could decide how and when to reopen the temples or which safety norms they are supposed to follow to check the threat of spread of novel coronavirus.”

The absence of any official guidelines aside, management of various temples like Bade Hanuman Temple have gone ahead with the preparations to welcome devotees after 75 days, while ensuring social distancing.

“We have divided the entire premises of the temple in four buffer zones and 25 circles have been marked in each of them so that devotees can stand while maintaining distance. Besides, two canopies have been set up at the two entry points of the ‘garbh grah’ (the section where idol of lord Hanuman is placed) and these canopies are fitted with sanitiser sprinklers. The sprinklers would sanitise every devotee entering the temple,” said mahant Anand Giri, one of the office-bearers of the Bade Hanuman temple.

“The authorities have put up several placards and notices on the premises to urge devotees to wear masks and not to touch the iron railing, bells or the idol,” he added.

He said that no devotee would be allowed to offer flowers or prasad within the temple. They will enter the temple empty-handed once he/she goes through the sanitising canopy.

At the Kali temple in Kydganj, an automatic sanitiser machine has been installed at the entrance. “We have put up a sanitising machine and a washbasin along with soap. The washbasin is for those devotees who prefer washing hands to using a sanitiser,” said Alok Mishra, a local corporator.

The Hanuman temple in Civil Lines, the Durga temple in Attarsuiya and the Kalyani Devi temple are among the other temples who are busy with preparations to welcome back devotees.


