Unlock 1.0: Bengalureans apprehensive about stepping out
2020-06-08
June 8 is a big day for the city’s restaurants, cafes, religious spaces and malls, as they open doors to patrons after over two months of lockdown. It’s a happy time for the stakeholders of these businesses/public spaces, but will Bengalureans make a beeline for them?
We asked a few city celebrities if they would head out tomorrow, considering that malls, restaurants and religious centres have stepped up sanitation protocols and have been reassuring patrons that their safety is priority and this is what they had to say…

Need to control the urge to step out
These are tough times and we need to try and contain our urge to step out as much as possible. I am not sure if I will visit any of these places soon, unless and until I am convinced about the venue, like, for instance, a hot spot run by people personally known to me who can guarantee me that I'm going to be fine.
- Sriimurali, actor

Not going out till the end of this year
I will definitely not be stepping out. I think this will be the case for most of us till the end of this year, since there seems to be no containing of the virus at least for now. I see no point in anyone visiting these spaces, when you can cook at home. I might be fine with takeaway, but I'm not revisiting my favourite cafes anytime soon. 
Meghana Gaonkar, actress

Those with kids and older people at home need to be extra careful
Coronavirus has not gone anywheret. I have a young son at home, so I need to be all the more careful. I feel there are enough people on the streets who have reasons to be there. Unless and until I have pressing matters, I will not head out.
Sheetal Sharma, choreographer

Cannot live in a bubble forever; just exercise caution
People must not panic and need to be cautious. They need not change their lives completely. We have to accept that this virus is here to stay for a while. However, you cannot live in a bubble forever. We must exercise caution, so I will carry a bottle of sanitiser with me, wear a mask in public and maintain physical distancing. 

While stepping out into the new normal, remember...


 In crowded areas, strictly follow mandatory precautions - use a mask, sanitise your hands and maintain social distance.
 Do not carry used disposable masks back home, dispose them with precaution. If using a cloth /reusable mask, disinfect it every single day. 
 A general heightened awareness on social distancing and sanitisation is vital at this phase. Remember, normal is a double-sided coin now. 
 Once home, ensure that the footwear used outside is disinfected and sanitize too. 
-- Inputs from Dr Ravindra Mehta, Senior Consultant Interventional Pulmonologist at a city hospital



