Unlock 1.0 brings no cheer to caterers, cameramen, tent owners & wedding card printers
2020-06-03
Bareilly: With marriages called off and all bookings canceled, thousands of people involved in organizing weddings have lost their earnings in Bareilly region also. And the government’s decision to allow weeding with a cap on the number of guests to check the spread of Covid-19 is unlikely to bring cheers on their face. Card publishers, cameramen, caterers, tent owners, dairy product suppliers have to wait a little more for respite.

“With fewer guests allowed, people will prefer to either postpone the wedding or complete the rituals with just family members participating. Which means no cards will be printed. No caterer will be required and obviously there will be no decoration, marriage halls and high-end cameras to cover the event,” a wedding organizer said.

Tent owners in Shahjahanpur normally book the important venues in advance for the important dates of the year to ensure they get the order for tent and decoration. But, their trick has brought them loss instead of profit this time.

Suneel Gupta, president of photographer’s association, said, “Nearly 1,200 people are associated with photography business in Bareilly and they were expecting a business of nearly Rs 1.5 to 2crore during wedding season. Many marriages were called off and many photo studio owners are planning to temporarily switch their business.”

“We are not needed because everyone’s face has to be covered with a mask. People don’t want their functions to be covered by an outsider. Many people are asking for the advance back. We have purchased expensive drones to cater the need of the customer and now it is impossible to pay the EMIs,” said a photographer. 

Anand Singh, an invitation card seller, said, “We have suffered massive loss as we take very less amount as a token money for the cards. Now the cards are ready and most of the customers are not turning up to take their cards. We have made advance payments to main suppliers and the cards can’t be reused as content is already printed on them. We are unsure about the future as there is no customer footfall in our shop now.”

Lucky Gandhi, a caterer, told TOI, “There are many people like dishwasher, waiters, generator boys, chef who are associated with us. They are suffering more than us because they get money for the work they did and due to lack of catering orders, we can only help them for a small period of time.”


