Unlock 1.0: Religious places all set to open their gates again, but with riders
2020-06-08
Ludhiana: As religious places in the district are all set to reopen from Monday, the managements or bodies managing the affairs of these places have started preparations to keep a check on rush of devotees while laying special stress on sanitization and social distancing.

While some religious places have limited the entry of devotees at a time, many have decided to keep main events a low-key affair and some have even canceled the events to avoid crowding.

The government has already issued standard operating procedures (SOPs) for opening of religious places from June 8. On Friday, the SHOs concerned also talked to the heads of religious places to ensure implementation of all precautionary measures.

Mahant Narayan Das Puri of ancient Sangla Wala Shivala temple in old city said, “We have got the entire premises sanitized. Besides, the bells in the temple won’t be used. The temple opens from 5am to 12noon and then 5pm to 9pm. Limited people will go inside the area where there is Shivling. Once they return, more people would be sent.”

“Anticipating heavy rush during morning and evening aarti, devotees will be accommodated in the outer area which is quite spacious and limited ones will be allowed near the Shivling,” he added.

“Further, sevadars will be at the entrance of the temple for thermal screening of devotees and sanitisation. Further, the devotees will be urged to enter the premises after washing their handsm” the mahant said.

Moulana Muhammad Usma Rehmani Ludhianvi, Naib Shahi Imam Punjab, said, “We will limit the number of devotees coming for prayers. About 500 devotees come for prayer on Juma. At one time only 50 people will be allowed to come and next 50 after 15 minutes. 

“

Pritpal Singh Pali, president of managing committee of Gurdwara Dukhniwaran Sahib, Filed Gunj, said, “The gurdwara has a big enough hall. People will be made to sit at a safe distance. The sanitization tunnel has been installed at the entrance. The sevadars will wear gloves. Devotees will be allowed to go and get prasad one by one. Further, we have canceled all the samagms.”

Police commissioner Rakesh Agarwal said, “All SHOs, ACPs and ADCPs have been asked to talk to the representatives of religious places under their jurisdiction. The SOP guidelines have been shared with them. ” 


