#unlockdiaries:Nahoum’s welcomes back bakery loyalists with almond pastry, plum cake and more
2020-06-09
Loyal customers poured in at Nahoum and Sons on Monday as the iconic bakery in New Market reopened doors 79 days. They are currently operating with just 25% staff and have limited items on the menu. “Gradually, we will bring back more products. Ever since New Market opened on June 1, we’ve been flooded with calls from our esteemed customers asking why our bakery didn’t open that day. We deal with perishable items and with the ongoing labour and transportation issues, we took time to reopen after two rounds of sanitisation,” said manager Jagadish Chandra Haldar, who has been working there from 1978. 

What’s available?
Heart cake, plum cake, brownie, almond pastry, jam tart, garlic bread, sliced bread and German bread


‘I’ll buy garlic bread and heart cake’

Giovanna Caruso, who was the first customer Nahoum’s greeted on Monday morning, shares her experience with CT I am from Italy but a lot of my friends stay in Kolkata and I visit every year. This time I got stuck here because of the lockdown. Last Monday, I came to New Market with a lot of excitement but seeing Nahoum’s closed, I returned home with a heavy heart. No one was sure when they would reopen. However, when I visited the market on Wednesday to buy a kitchen board, one of the shopkeepers informed me that the bakery was reopening today. And so, here I am at my favourite place in town right after the gates opened. I will go around every corner of the shop for the smell I’ve been missing since so long. I knew the old man who used to sit at the counter and every person in the shop knows me well as I get a lot of goodies packed from here every year while flying back to Italy. I have been their customer for more than 40 years and there is a host of memories associated with this place. Some of those memories are etched on my heart. I love their breadsticks and plum cake. Sadly, they don’t have the breadsticks today, so I will buy some garlic bread and heart cake. Now that everything is gradually reopening, I hope to fly back to Italy soon with some delicious goodies from Nahoum’s. I have positive vibes seeing some people in New Market. This is the new normal and we ought to accept it. We need to move on while respecting social distancing, safety and hygiene norms. 



