Unlock 1.0 brings smiles back on faces of shop owners
2020-06-02
Nagpur: Municipal commissioner Tukaram Mundhe has allowed shops to open from June 5 as a part of state government’s lockdown relaxation move. Shops on one side of the road will be open on one day and those on the other side the next day and so on.BC Bhartia, who has been re-elected as Confederation of All India Traders (CAIT), said that it was a positive step that economic activity had been set rolling. “We would request commissioner to sanitize all the markets with the help of fire brigade so that confidence of all customers, shopkeepers and shop workers increases. I urge shopkeepers to use masks, wash their hands frequently and maintain safe distancing. This is the only way to keep the markets open,” he added.Ashwin Mehadia, president of Nag Vidarbha Chamber of Commerce (NVCC), said that businessmen were very happy over the development. “However, they have to ensure that corona doesn’t spread so that markets are not closed again,” he further said.Karan Grover, owner of a mobile store, while appreciating the order said that customers should not indulge in panic buying. “They should not crowd the stores and buy more than that is required. They think that the NMC may close down the market any day. Opening of markets won’t solve all our problems. Dealers like me are facing problems due to wholesalers and companies. They have stopped all schemes. We are unable to give discounts to our customers,” he added.Rohit Jain, garage owner, said that the odd-even rule should be done away with. “My shop is on one side of the road and the auto spare parts opposite me. So if a customer comes to my garage and needs a spare part, he will have to buy it the next day and then come to my garage again on the second day,” he added.Tejinder Singh Renu, president of Nagpur Residential Hotels Association, said that he appreciated the order by the commissioner, which was anticipated in permitting opening up of non-essential services in phases. Many citizens were eager to start morning and evening walks and cycling. This can be done by maintaining social distancing. Opening of shops on odd even basis is a good decision.“However, clarification on maids and servants permitted for house duties is required. Likewise, opening of hotels and restaurants is also requested. We will certainly follow all guidelines and standard operating procedures as prescribed by the government. After all we want to keep our guests and ourselves safe too,” he added.