Coronavirus in Bihar: Unprecedented shutdown to keep coronavirus at bay
2020-03-23
PATNA: The 14-hour ‘Janta curfew’ to prevent spread of coronavirus evoked a total response in the state on Sunday with people remaining indoors, vehicular traffic coming to a standstill and shops and business establishments, except for emergency services, remaining closed between 7am and 9pm. Streets in all cities, including Patna, wore a deserted look.


People were hardly seen coming out of their homes. Buses and autorickshaws remained off the roads. Only some private vehicles were seen plying on the roads. All the major roads, including national highways, were empty. The Mahatma Gandhi Setu, which usually remains choked, also wore a deserted look.

Not a single shop at the famous cloth market at Sutapatti in Muzaffarpur opened for business today. Motijheel, Kalyani Chowk and Saraiyaganj had no traffic at all.

Some children were seen playing cricket on the road near Neem Chowk at Muzaffarpur and some people fishing in a pond near Ambedkar Chowk at Dighwara in Saran district due to lack of awareness. “We decided to play cricket as the road, which remains busy due to heavy traffic, is empty today,” said Rakesh Kumar, (22), a resident of Aghoria Bazar locality of the district headquarters town.

Police personnel were seen doing their regular job. “It’s our duty and we would do everything possible to prevent the spread of coronavirus,” said Hajipur DSP Raghav Dayal, who was on the road to ensure that people came out of homes only for emergency services and essential commodities.

Another police officer, Arun Kumar, who is posted in Arwal district, said the purpose behind the exercise was not allowing people to form groups. “We are making an appeal to the people to stay at home for everyone’s safety,” Kumar, who was earlier posted as the SHO of Barun police station in neighbouring Aurangabad district, said.

Additional director general (headquarters) Jitendra Kumar said, “Police personnel were deployed to facilitate smooth movement of people from railway stations and airport to their homes. However, no additional forces were deployed.”

In Bhagalpur and Banka districts, there was a complete lockdown. Streets, market areas, railway stations, taxi stands and bus stands wore a deserted look as people chose to remain indoors. Doctors’ clinics and medical shops were opened in order to cater to the needs of patients.

Begusarai too wore a deserted look as people remained confined to their homes. NH-31, which passes through the town and remains busy 24x7, had virtually no traffic and wore a desolated look. Private and government hospitals also had virtually no patients on Sunday. People in rural areas also remained indoors.

Vehicular traffic was off the roads in Sitamarhi district on Sunday, except ambulances and a few emergency vehicles. One a few medicine shops, grocery stores and vegetable shops were open.

Over 22 lakh people in Nawada district, except a few, responded positively to the curfew by remaining indoors. Cops led by ASP (operations) Alok Mishra ensured minimum public movement in the town. At some places, a few adventurous and defiant youths were caned by cops for roaming around unnecessarily. Markets, commercial establishments, offices, both private and governmental, presented a deserted look.

The busy thoroughfares and arterial roads in Forbesganj, Jogbani and Araria were barren. All vehicles were off the roads with exceptions of rarely seen bicycles.

People in East Champaran district too stayed indoors. Almost all shops in Motihari, Raxaul, Sugauli, Chakiya, Dhaka and Pakaridayal towns were closed from early morning. Both the rural and the urban populace confined themselves to house. The Muzaffarpur-Lucknow NH-28 also wore a deserted look as only a few private vehicles and ambulance were seen plying in the morning hours.

Residents of Nalanda and Sheikhura districts kept themselves indoors and vehicular traffic in town areas and national highways passing through these districts were off the roads. Shops and other business establishments had their shutters down throughout the day. Even religious places like temples and dargahs wore deserted. Strangely, medical shops and petrol pumps which were kept outside the ambit of the curfew were mostly closed.

The curfew evoked unprecedented response in Khagaria district as well. While vehicular traffic were off the roads, markets, railway station and even remote areas wore a deserted look as people from every walk of life preferred to remain indoors.

All roads, markets, railway stations, towns and business establishments in West Champaran wore a deserted look. Men, women and children of remote and urban areas remained confined to their houses to ensure social distancing. Medical shops, however, remained opened.

(With inputs from Kumar Rajesh in Bhagalpur, Rajiv Kumar in Begusarai, S K Singh in Sitamarhi, S B Sinha in Nawada, L P Nayak in Araria, C B Pandey in Motihari, Farrukh Nadim in Biharsharif, N P Thakur in Khagaria and Tirthraj Kushwaha in Bagaha)


