Coronavirus cases in Kerala: Unsanitized ambulances, a cause for concern
2020-03-10
KOCHI: As Covid-19 cases reported from across the state are on the rise, there are allegations that ambulances used for shifting suspected patients to medical college from Cochin International Airport Limited (Cial) are not being sanitized properly. 

There are five ambulances engaged in shifting people with suspected Covid-19 to government medical college. As per norms, the vehicles should be sanitized after each trip. If the norms are not followed, it poses grave risks to the suspected Covid-19 cases being taken from the airport to the medical college for detailed tests and investigations.

 
 
According to the ambulance drivers, the vehicles are not properly sanitized after each trip, thereby posing a threat of the disease spreading. 

“We have brought the issue to the notice of health department officials and district collector,” said Biju K G, district president, Kerala Government Drivers Association (KGDA). The association has urged the Ernakulam district collector for immediate measures to sanitize ambulances. 

“There are no facilities to sanitize the vehicles at Government Medical College, Ernakulam. The ambulances have been pressed into service by the health department in the district. So, it is up to the department to ensure facilities,” said Dr Peter, superintendent, Government Medical College, Ernakulam. “Still, we will bring the issue to the notice of the district medical officer,” he said.

The health department officials said that a facility has been arranged at Cial. “We have arranged a facility at Cial. We will check if it is functioning well and take necessary action, if required,” said Dr N K Kuttappan, district medical officer.

However, Cial officials said that they don’t have anything to do with ambulance sanitization as it is being operated by district health authorities.

According to ambulance drivers, an agency, assigned to sanitize aircrafts at Cial, has been entrusted with sanitizing ambulances too. 

“I waited since Sunday afternoon for getting my ambulance sanitized. But the agency didn’t provide the service till Monday noon. I informed health department officials of the incident as I had to shift a person with suspected coronavirus by Monday afternoon,” a driver said. “Since the agency gives priority to sanitize flights, they hardly have time to sanitize the ambulances. Dedicated personnel should be deployed for sanitizing ambulances or else, the situation will turn worse.

The ambulance drivers are not provided any protective gear including uniforms, PPE kit, N 95 masks, etc. “While the ambulances are parked at Cial, the drivers take rest under the tree shades outside the airport. People are scared to come in contact with us too,” another driver said.

