Unwell daughter in her arms, Moradabad woman cop enforces lockdown
2020-04-21
BAREILLY: In an awe-inspiring display of dedication to work, a woman sub-inspector (SI) posted at Civil Lines police station was spotted carrying her “unwell” one-year-old daughter in arms even as she stood guard at Provincial Armed Constabulary (PAC) trisection to nab lockdown violators. "As the district is on the high alert and with multiple novel coronavirus positive cases pouring in each day, I have to manage and look after my child during the duty hours," said the SI. 


Nishu Kadiyan, SI, Moradabad police, said, “I have two children and a caretaker look after them when I am out on duty. Besides, my husband, a businessman, also helps me in looking after the children. However, my one-year-old daughter has been unwell for a couple of days and she wants me by her side all the time. Since she had a mild fever and needed my attention, I had to bring her with me. I cannot afford to skip my duty at a time when the entire department is fighting the spread of the pandemic.”

“Since the district is on the high alert, the police department is on its toes to ensure nobody violates the lockdown, and police personnel have been deputed at almost all prominent junctions and streets to ensure the lockdown compliance. Thus, I decided to report to my duty along with my baby rather than skipping it. Despite holding my baby in the arms, I have been performing my duty with full dedication and nabbed many people who were loitering in the area. On Monday, we issued around 20 e-challans for violating the lockdown norms,” added Kadiyan, who is in her 30s. 

Heaping praise on the SI, superintendent of police (city) Amit Anand told TOI that it came as a pleasant surprise to them as they learnt that “one of our constables is performing her duty so dedicatedly in such a testing time when the district has been declared a red zone with multiple Covid-19 positive cases being reported every day. The police department is taking all possible measures to combat the spread of the deadly virus and all our personnel are performing their duty with full dedication and devotion."

The SP, meanwhile, appealed to the people to stay at home and cooperate with police in making the lockdown successful. 


