UP government appoints nodal officers for Covid-19 control
2020-05-07
AGRA: In a bid to further tighten Covid-19 control measures across the state, the state government has appointed nodal officers in all the districts. The nodal officers have been directed to stay in the district for a week.

According to a senior official, these officials will look after every aspect of Covid-19 treatment and control, specifically in light of the huge influx of migrant labourers from other states in the coming days. The aim is to curb community spread of Novel Coronavirus.

The decision has also been taken in light of several recent reports that patients were not getting proper treatment, both medical and otherwise, in quarantine centres, especially in districts of western Uttar Pradesh. The senior district officials, however, aren’t too happy about the fact that these nodal officers will have a say in every Covid-19 related issue.

UP chief secretary Rajendra K Tewari said that additional officers are appointed to strengthen the work and help the district authorities as a lot of migrant workers are expected to return to the state. “These officials will closely work with the district authorities and report to the divisional commissioner of the region,” he said. 

However, district officials feel that this step is uncalled for. On condition of anonymity, an official said, “We have been toiling day and night and I fail to understand what this step would achieve apart from creating confusion and putting more bureaucratic hurdles.”

In Agra region, five nodal officers have been appointed including special secretary secretariat administration Akash Deep, special secretary rural drinking water and Namami Gange A Dinesh Kumar, mission director Kaushal Vikas Corporation Kushal Silku, joint MD of UP Jal Nigam Sanjay Kumar Khatri and PCS Ashok Kumar.

In Aligarh region, the four nodal officers include director social welfare of UP Bal Krishna Tripathi, special secretary UP science & technology Ved Pati Misra, special secretary agriculture production department Rajendra Singh and additional CEO UPEIDA Shrish Chandra Verma.

In April, UP government had nominated 15 senior IAS officers as nodal heads of those districts that reported 20 or more Covid-19 positive cases. These officers were to oversee the arrangements made in their respective districts to battle coronavirus.

The condition of Agra, Aligarh, Firozabad and Mathura continues to aggravate with each passing day as more cases have come to light. Till now, Agra has reported 655 positive cases, Firozabad 168, Aligarh 50 and Mathura 36. 


