Uttar Pradesh man who came by train is state’s second coronavirus case
2020-03-19
CHENNAI: Tamil Nadu on Wednesday reported its second positive case of Covid-19 — a youth from Rampur district in Uttar Pradesh who came to Chennai on March 12. The 20-year-old hairdresser is now in the first-floor isolation ward in tower 2 at Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital and his condition is stable, health minister C Vijayabaskar said.


“He came to Chennai from New Delhi by train and was staying with friends at an apartment in Chennai. He reported to the hospital with symptoms on Tuesday. He was tested positive today [Wednesday],” the minister said.

Health department officials refused to reveal the coach number and the name of the train he travelled in or the place where he stayed in Chennai for five days before he was isolated in the government hospital. “We are still gathering details,” the minister said. “We will not able to reveal further details as it relates to patient confidentiality.” States like Kerala release flow charts of the places a positive patient has visited along with the time and date to alert people about a possible infection, but public health authorities in Chennai say they will not be able to do this as it might cause needless panic. Officials say the man boarded the train to Chennai on March 10 but did not have any “explicit” symptoms.

He developed symptoms on Monday night and came to the hospital on Tuesday morning. “He reported to the Covid-19 op ward where we see patients with shortness of breath, cough and fever. Doctors suspected he could be infected. He is kept in isolation, but his condition is stable,” said dean Dr R Jayanthi. After two tests, on Wednesday evening, the state-run King Institute for Preventive Medicine confirmed he was positive for novel coronavirus infection.

As of now, officials suspect the patient might have travelled to Nepal. “We are still talking to him,” said health secretary Beela Rajesh. “He has been to Delhi, travelled on a train and has moved around in Chennai. We are told his symptoms started only when he was here.”

Public health officials are tracking his contacts, including fellow travellers, relatives and friends. The state’s first Covid-19 patient, who tested negative after treatment at Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital, was discharged on Monday.


