UP mob attacks doctors, cops of quarantine team
2020-04-16
BAREILLY: A team of health workers and police officials came under heavy stone pelting by an irate mob on Wednesday when they reached Nagphani in Moradabad, UP, to take away the brother of a deceased Covid-19 patient to a quarantine facility. Two doctors and four cops suffered serious injuries in the attack.


Condemning the incident, UP chief minister Yogi Adityanath ordered action under the National Security Act (NSA) against those involved in the assault.

The Covid-19 patient had died on Monday and his brother has developed fever and cold, classic coronavirus symptoms. Nagphani has, meanwhile, been "sealed" and declared a "Covid hotspot".


It's time to mask up and stay safe: Join TOI's #MaskIndia campaign

Sources said rumours that some individuals would be picked up from the minority-populated area for testing and sent to quarantine centres "no less than detention camps" started it all.

Defying lockdown norms, a mob of around 100 targeted the two ambulances and police vehicles that had come to Nagphani to take with them the Covid patient's brother. At least 25 people, including 10 women, were later arrested by police. Raids are on to nab the others.

"When the family came out of their house on seeing a medical and police team, people there started throwing stones at us. The situation is under control now though,” SSP Amit Pathak, who rushed to the spot along with DM RK Singh, said. Pathak added that section 144 was violated and the men and women responsible for it will also be charged under Epidemic Diseases Act and Disaster Management Act. "Plus, action will be taken under the National Security Act. An FIR is being registered under relevant sections.”



More on Covid-19


 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
  21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
  How to quarantine yourself at home
  Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news
 

One of the ambulance drivers said a large crowd assembled as they reached the place. Under attack, some of the health workers had to hide in the narrow bylanes. “Two doctors and a few health workers were hurt. The doctors, I believe, have suffered major injuries,” he said, claiming that the people even tore the safety jackets of the medical team.


