UP seals 28 areas where Tablighi Jamaat members tested positive
2020-04-07
LUCKNOW: Ten localities in Rae Bareli district were sealed on Monday after two Jamaatis, who had returned from Delhi, were tested positive. Another locality was sealed in Sitapur district after eight Bangladeshis living in a house owned by one Sadiq in Khairabad area tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday.

In all, 28 localities in the state have been sealed as many Jamaatis, who had returned from different parts of the country and were staying in mosques and residential houses there, have tested positive for Covid-19. Apart from Rae Bareli and Sitapur, different localities in Lucknow, Varanasi, Pratapgarh, Hathras, Ghazipur, Azamgarh and Kanpur have also been sealed.


Additional Director-General of police, law and order, PV Ramasastry told TOI that district police chiefs and two police commissioners have been issued a set of instructions, including setting up of a rapid action team (RAT) and a nodal corona cell in co-ordination with other departments, for effective handling of any situation arising out of Covid-19 spread in the state. 

“A standard operating procedure (SOP) which includes a proper way to tackle risk areas as per international standards has been shared with the districts,” he said and added that necessary equipment required for launching any operation has been made available to police chiefs of all the districts in the state.

In Rae Bareli, superintendent of police Swapnil Mamgain said that 200 policemen have been deployed in Nagar Kotwali area and the entire locality has been sealed after two Jamaatis, who had returned from Nizamuddin markaz and were staying in a ‘dharmashala’, were tested positive. “The ten localities, that have been sealed in Rae Bareli, are small in size comprising roughly 5,000 families. All these ten areas come under one police station. Fire and health workers are continuously sanitizing all these localities,” Mamgain added.

Similarly, entire three-km area of Khairabad in Sitapur district was sealed on Monday. District Magistrate, Sitapur, Akhilesh Tiwari said the area would remain sealed till April 9.

“The decision to this effect was taken after eight Bangladeshis, who had returned from Tablighi Jamaat's congregation in Delhi and who were staying in a house owned by one Sadiq in Khairabad area, were . Later, all of them were tested Covid-19 positive,” said circle officer, Khairabad, Yogendra Singh. 

He added that one company of provincial armed constabulary (PAC) and 200 cops have been deployed in the area.


