UP to launch pooled testing for coronavirus today
2020-04-14
LUCKNOW: After due clearance from the Indian Council of Medical Research, the Uttar Pradesh government will undertake pooled testing of coronavirus samples from Tuesday. 


While the state is the first in the country to be adopting the technique, the method is being successfully used in Israel and Germany. The technique will be launched from Agra, which accounts for the maximum burden of cases in UP as of now. Data shows that 23% (or 139) of the 603 cases reported in UP are from Agra. 

“In pooled testing, we will combine several samples and test them for presence of coronavirus in a group. If the outcome is negative, all persons whose sample has been taken will be considered free from the infection. But if the sample tests positive, all persons will be tested again. The method will speed up testing which is crucial to containment of coronavirus pandemic,” said principal secretary health and family welfare. 

State surveillance officer Vikasendu Agarwal said: “We will be covering 100 people to create 20 super samples comprising swabs from five persons in a batch. They will collected and brought in a special triple-layer packing to KGMU for testing.” 

On why Agra was chosen for pooled testing, Agarwal said: “Containment is crucial in Agra which is home to 22-odd hotspots. Also, the set-up in Agra is extremely robust as it is the place which provided the template for UP.” 

Data gathered from Agra will be used to validate the technique for Uttar Pradesh. The experience will be used to scale up testing in other hotspots including Meerut, Saharanpur and Gautam Buddha Nagar. 

Researchers across the country are watching UP’s bold and clever move. 

“If pooled testing in UP works well, states with higher burden will be able to improvise their strategies for infection containment,” said Vishwajeet Kumar, epidemiologist and community medicine researcher. 

Researchers in Israel have already proved that the method was useful for super samples as large as 64 swabs.


