UP to aid daily wagers for loss due to virus outbreak
2020-03-18
LUCKNOW/ NEW DELHI: Uttar Pradesh government on Tuesday set up a committee to work out how much financial assistance should be provided to daily wage labourers who have or might lose their jobs due to the coronavirus-induced economic slowdown. This came even as a committee of secretaries at the Centre will consider a similar suggestion forwarded by different ministries to PMO.


TOI has learnt that different ministries have suggested to the PMO that in view of the condition of unorganised workers who are daily wage earners, some monetary relief may be provided by the respective state governments so that they can be asked to stay at home during the critical period.

In the case of UP, power minister and government spokesperson Shrikant Sharma said, “The committee will be headed by the finance minister and has been asked to submit its report within three days. The CM has desired that daily wagers are given some kind of financial assistance through RTEGS transfer during this period when businesses are being affected due to the coronavirus scare.” It will identify how much assistance should be given to each daily wager to ensure that their families can survive and will also recommend the basis for identification of such workers and how many will be benefited by the scheme.

Sources said the PMO had sought suggestions from all ministries and departments about the steps that the government can take. Some of the suggestions include establishing more places for quarantine including vacant hostels, schools, colleges, indoor stadiums, large halls and even marriage halls.

They have suggested increasing self-quarantine of suspected patients with surveillance by health workers and neighbours and also publicise information of legal action against cases of non-cooperation for taking preventive measures.

One of the suggestions is that a team should be designated to ensure data upkeep and to pursue with states on updation of the data from both private and government sector.

