UPSBC resumes Choupla flyover construction during lockdown
2020-05-08
BAREILLY: The Uttar Pradesh State Bridge Corporation (UPSBC) has resumed construction work of Choupla flyover in the city. Officials at Bridge Corporation told TOI on Thursday that only 15% of construction work was completed in the project and thus, work has now been taken up even as the lockdown is still in place. 

All measures pertaining to pandemic are being followed. The labour deputed at the construction site has been directed to strictly adhere to the guidelines of social distancing while proper hand gloves, face masks, sanitisers have also been provided. Work on other pending projects will be resumed soon, said officials.

UPSBC deputy project manager (DPM) Bareilly, BK Sen told TOI, “We have resumed construction of Choupla flyover in the city considering that much work is pending in the project. At present, carrying out construction is much easier as there is no traffic on roads and we do not need to do barricading. We wanted to utilize the lockdown period and thus, construction finally resumed on Thursday. So far, only 15% of work has been done in flyover construction at Choupla, but now, work has been taken up on a war footing.” 

DPM Sen added, “All precautions are being taken by the Bridge Corporation and the entire labour assigned at the project site. The workers have been issued guidelines to maintain social distancing even as they work in field and follow all rules and regulations stated during the Covid lockdown. Each one of them has been provided face masks, hand sanitisers and gloves to protect themselves.”

Officials at UP State Bridge Corporation said that thermal screening of workers deputed will also be conducted from time to time while necessary steps are being taken up by the corporation employees, engineers, among others, who visit the project site. While all of them are being frequently briefed and sensitised of the dos and don’ts related to the pandemic. 

The construction of Choupla flyover in the city was taken up by UPSBC in 2019. Being developed at a total cost of Rs 59 crore, the 793-metre flyover is being constructed to ease traffic burden from Choupla junction and existing Badaun flyover. 

DPM Sen further said, “The upcoming flyover will connect Ayub Khan, Police Lines, Quila crossing and existing Badaun flyover. We have set July 2021 as the deadline to complete the project.”

