UPSRTC starts 15-day public awareness campaign to sensitize passengers about Covid-19
2020-03-17
Bareilly: In an attempt to spread awareness among public regarding Coronavirus and ensure prevention from the deadly disease, UPSRTC has kickstarted a 15-day awareness campaign to sensitize public. For the purpose, video clippings displaying messages on prevention from Covid-19 and dos and don’ts will be played at all bus-stations, on LED TVs in AC buses of corporation. Besides, announcements regarding the same will also be made at the enquiry rooms to sensitize passengers of the spreading virus. Officials at UPSRTC said that steps are being taken up to address public as masses gather at the bus-stations on a daily basis. Adequate arrangements of hand sanitizers and clean washrooms are being ensured. Additionally, masks are being provided to corporation employees, especially those working in fields, including drivers and conductors.

Speaking to TOI, Raj Shekhar, UPSRTC managing director, said, “Considering the outbreak of the deadly virus, UPSRTC has kickstarted a two-week-long awareness campaign across the state to sensitize passengers. Efforts are being made to make people aware of Coronavirus, its causes and how can one protect himself from getting infected. The corporation has prepared clips giving awareness messages, dos and don’ts to be followed for prevention and cure of Covid-19. Since thousands of people visit public places like bus stations regularly and travel in roadways buses on a daily basis, efforts are being made to make people aware audio/visual messages.”

UPSRTC MD added, “Besides, counseling sessions will be held where bus drivers, conductors and other staff members will be briefed frequently about the deadly disease and measures to be taken while in field. People including field workers of corporation will be apprised of using masks and hand sensitizers. Moreover, frequent fumigation of buses and stations will also be carried out during the period.”

Official sources also informed that a separate control room is being set up at UPSRTC headquarters where any suspected case that comes in the knowledge of corporation workers, will be reported and addressed immediately. MD Raj Shekhar added, “Buses that are being operated in cities (Agra, Noida, Ghaziabad, Lucknow, etc) where suspected and confirmed cases of Covid-19 have been reported previously, will be undergoing fumigation frequently. Corporation officials including RMs and ARMs have been directed to coordinate with district administration in this connection.” 

SK Banerjee, UPSRTC Bareilly division, regional manager, said, “Necessary instructions were issued from UPSRTC headquarters through a recent video conferencing and directions have been given to corporation workers at our level to ensure compliance. Adequate steps will be taken up to sensitize people visiting the bus stations and those travelling in buses during the awareness campaign.” 


