Upward spiral continues: Number of Covid-19 patients in Mysuru rises to 35
2020-04-07
Mysuru: The district saw a rise in the number of Covid-19 positive cases on Monday with seven more persons contracting the virus, pushing the total tally to 35. The district authorities have appealed to residents to voluntarily come forward for testing in case they have visited Delhi for meeting. 

Among those tested positive, three belong to Tablighi Jamaat group and they are residents of Delhi. The fourth person is a primary contact of a Dubai traveller, who is in Covid hospital. The rest three–one is an employee of Jubilant Generics and the other two are primary contacts of the pharmaceutical company employees. 

Deputy commissioner Abhiram G Sankar said all the seven cases detected are either primary contacts of employees of the pharmaceutical firm in Nanjangud or part of the group that attended Tablighi Jamaat meeting in New Delhi. Mysuru has no cases outside these two clusters, he said. 

A total of 10 Delhi residents arrived in Mysuru in January and since then they are staying here. They had visited parts of Mandya and Bengaluru before they were tracked and quarantined. Of the 10, eight have been tested positive. The group had contacted eight other local residents who are also under quarantine. 

The deputy commissioner has appealed to residents to voluntarily approach Covid hospital in case they have visited Delhi to attend the Tablighi Jamaat conference.

The employee of Nanjangud firm who has tested positive along with two others had contacts the with previous employees isolated at Covid hospital. The other one had contacts with second Covid patient who belongs to Kerala. 

Meanwhile, the deputy commissioner has warned of action against those removing posters affixed by health department on the houses of home-quarantined. Action will be taken under provisions of Epidemic Diseases Act, the DC said.

So far, 1,533 have completed home quarantine period of 14 days but continue to be under observation. As on date, 1,334 are under home quarantine in Mysuru.

Covid suspect flees from hospital, traced

The authorities at Mandya Institute of Medical Sciences (MIMS) were on their toes on Monday as one of the suspected Covid-19 persons escaped from the isolation ward.

The suspected person, who is among those who were in touch with Tablighi Jamaat clerics in Malavalli town, had escaped from the isolation ward. The medical staff soon informed police.

SP Parashuram and other officers rushed to the hospital and teams were sent to trace the suspect. The policers officers scanned CCTV footages of hospital and surrounding areas to trace the fleeing man.

After long hours of frantic search, he was found in his relative’s house at Guttalu Colony. He was taken to hospital and warned of serious legal actions if he does attempt to flee from isolation ward again.

As many as 52 persons who were in touch with Tablighi Jamaat clerics are put in isolation ward in MIMS and district authorities are waiting for their medical report. Mysuru’s five Tablighi Jamaat attendees are all housed in Mandya before they left for Mysuru.

Meanwhile, the district administration has arranged vegetables and fruits to be supplied at the doorstep of customers to avoid them going out for purhcases. More than 30 goods autos have been hired for this purpose. The HOPCOMS officers said that this facility would be extend to other parts of the district in coming days.

Photo caption

Deputy commissioner Venkatesh inaugurates the supply of vegetables and fruits to households in Mandya on Monday.


