Urban areas become Covid’s playground
2020-04-21
VISAKHAPATNAM: About 80% of the Covid-19 cases in the state were reported from urban pockets. Among the 722 cases reported as of Monday morning, nearly 600 cases are from various municipal corporations, municipalities and other urban areas. A majority of contact cases and deaths, too, have been reported from urban areas. 


In view of the increased number of infections in urban areas, the state government has directed the officials of all cities, towns and municipalities to adopt the extended lockdown and all restrictions will remain in place till May 3.

Factors such as density of population, number of international travellers and activity level have been attributed to the large instance of Covid-19 cases in urban areas than in their rural counterparts. The same factors, however, are making tracing the origin of the disease more complicated. Krishna district officials recently raised an alarm over the increasing number of Covid-19 cases with untraceable origin in Vijayawada city.

ICSSR senior fellow and former head of the department of geography, Andhra University, Prof B Hema Malini, who has previously geographically mapped various diseases in the state, said social distancing may not be possible in some parts of the urban areas given the narrow bylanes and people living in clusters. “The cities and towns usually have a significant number of commuter and commercial activity, and higher number of foreign travellers. These factors will subsequently have a direct proportionate effect on the spread of the disease and the number of cases,” said Prof Hema Malini.

Meanwhile, Andhra Pradesh has received about 1.16 lakh rapid diagnostic kits for screening people in containment clusters in 97 red zone mandals. Nearly 16,800 healthcare workers, who have dealt with or come into contact with a Covid positive/suspected case, will be tested with these devices. The group of healthcare workers comprises doctors and other personnel who handle Covid patients, healthcare personnel involved in sample collection and transportation, and medical and other personnel working at quarantine and isolation centres.

About 70,000 kits will be used for households with persons with influenza-like symptoms, high-risk or vulnerable persons in cluster zones. The remaining 27,000 kits will test persons with mild symptoms in three rounds of door-to-door survey and are yet to be tested.


