Urgent pleas on the rise for e-access to children, during lockdown in Mumbai, Pune family courts
2020-05-01
MUMBAI: Over the weekend during lockdown, a father called up his young daughter for a face-time chat. It was his 15-minutes of court assigned access, twice weekly. The daughter, a tiny tot, around two years old, smiled brightly and after an excited “Hello Papa’’, ran away and then round and round the table where her mother sat and had placed the smart phone. The mother and estranged father now looked on in awkward silence, indulged in small chit-chat about their little one and waited for her to come back to the phone. The couple were abiding by a recent urgent order for online access to the non-custodial parent.


Given the prevailing restrictions during the covid-19 lockdown, estranged parents, often fathers, are unable to exercise their physical child access at the children’s complex at the city’s family court in Bandra. With family court’s regular functioning being shut for almost 6 weeks, more parents are moving the family court for urgent access on phone calls or more particularly e-access via video-calls.

The family court at Bandra has been shut for more than five weeks and takes only urgent matters via emails. “Most of these urgent matters relate to requests for child access via videocalls,’’ said a court official.

 Non-custodial parents and many during the pandemic and the lockdown are struggling to maintain proper contact with their children. “Lack of even phone or face-time call access during the lockdown could lead to further alienation since physical access is impossible rendering such children being unable to interact with their fathers,’’ said one father who had petitioned the family court for such urgent access.

Lawyers in Mumbai say they have witnessed a rise in calls from worried parents who had been granted access pre-lockdown.

Veteran family court lawyers like Mrinalini Deshmukh, Chitra Phadke and the family court bar chief Sasi Nair also spoke of how they have received calls from parents seeking ways to comply with child access orders. In Pune too, parents have petitioned and got orders for e-access to children, said a Delhi-based advocate Neela Gokhale and her Pune-based partner advocate Shirin Merchant, about two cases. In one case father got “virtual access every day for half hour,’’ said Gokhale.

“It is a sensitive issue. Parents have called and enquired about child access order compliances. Some agreed to let children speak over the phone during the lockdown. Am hopeful that some couples may even bond this way and eventually reconcile,’’ said Nair. Deshmukh, said that she received calls too as in some cases, parents were using the lockdown to not even grant email or phone call access. “Access of children is already a usually vexed issue with warring couples,’’ she said and the “lockdown has heightened concerns for some.’’

While it is often fathers, especially when children are pre-schoolers, who are petitioning the court for e-access during the social-distancing times, a mother too had approached the court. Advocate Chitra Phadke said that the child, aged five, was with the father and wife had earlier been granted physical access four days a week for five hours. Since it was not possible to meet, he even before court could pass orders, volunteers to give online-access. The mother has also moved for urgent orders for complete access for the summer vacation till mid-June now, where she can take the child home too.

In yet another case, a doctor-father, moved for urgent access during the lockdown to his two minor sons, one of who he hadn’t seen or spoken to for over 10 months, he said. The family court two weeks ago denied his request and observed that the pandemic is a worldwide phenomenon. He approached the Bombay high court in appeal and his plea was heard on Thursday where the court in a proceeding held via video-conferencing granted him three 15-minute video-call interactions in a week with his sons.

Another family court lawyer Anagha Nimbkar also added, “I also encourage clients to provide access during lockdown through videoconferencing and calls on apps.''

The lockdown is leading parents to make ingenuous pleas to gain access too. A father made a futile bid before the Bombay HC to gain physical access of his seven-year-old recently during the lockdown. The HC rejected his plea finding no reason to disbelieve that the natural mother of a child would not guard him from the corona virus. The wife had already approached the HC to challenge a December 2018 order of the family court that had granted him weekend access to their child.

