US asks India to ensure hotels ‘continue to lodge' its citizens during lockdown
2020-03-26
NEW DELHI: After Russia, America has also sought India’s intervention in ensuring that their tourists here do not face problems during the lockdown. They have both sought cooperation from authorities here so those visitors are able to reach airports and take special flights back home. There have been several reports of foreigners being asked to leave hotels.


On Wednesday, the US embassy in India Tweeted: “We are in contact with the Indian government to emphasise the need for hotels to continue to lodge US citizens during the nationwide curfew.” Ken Juster, US Ambassador to India, Tweeted: “The US Mission to India continues to work with State Department and airline companies to arrange flights from India to the US for U.S citizens. Once flights are arranged, we will work with the government of India to arrange to the greatest extent possible safe passage to airports for US citizens.”

A special aircraft flew back Russian tourists home from here on Wednesday. The Goa Airport tweeted: “Despite all odds and skeletal staff on duty at Goa Airport, relief flight to Russia takes off with 121 passengers. Few more in coming days.”

Like Indians stranded abroad, foreign tourists in India are facing a tough time due to flight restrictions that has made returning home for many difficult. The Russian Embassy, for instance, has got distress messages from many its citizens holidaying in India about being evicted from their hotels in places like Kullu and Vrindavan.

“The Embassy of Russia stays in touch with Russian nationals who are presently in India, several thousand in total. We are cooperating with the government of India and local authorities to assist them. Aeroflot has arranged for a special flight from Delhi to Moscow on Wednesday. Many passengers are now on their way and we work closely with our Indian counterparts to ensure their safe return home,” Nikolay Kudashev, Russia’s Ambassador to India, had told TOI on Tuesday. 

The Russian embassy estimates several thousand Russian citizens are stranded in India currently. Of them, about 1,000 have informed the embassy of their whereabouts. 

“Among Russians who are unable to leave the country, most are in Goa and Rishikesh. There are many in almost every corner of India. The Embassy of Russia updates the advisory on its web-site. Telephone hotlines were launched at the Embassy as well as at every Consulate General of Russian (Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai) to guide people in distress,” Yevgeny Bezeka, press secretary of the Russian embassy, had recently said.

Earlier this month, the Indian Association of Tour Operators (IATO), an apex body for Indian tourism industry, had informed the government that many foreign tourists — especially those corona hotspots like Italy, South Korea, Iran and Japan — have been denied check-in by hotels in different parts of the country.

