US team developing coronavirus vaccine tailored for elderly
2020-03-18
PUNE: A team of researchers of the Precision Vaccines Program (PVP) at Boston Children’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School in the US is developing a vaccine for the elderly to guard against the novel coronavirus.


Coronavirus in India live updates

The team is combining the spike protein of the novel coronavirus with known vaccine adjuvants. Adjuvants are agents which are added to a vaccine to boost the recipient’s immune response to produce more antibodies and longer-lasting immunity. 

The antigen that is currently being used for vaccine development is the spike protein from the novel coronavirus. This protein sits atop the spikes on the virus and mediates coronavirus entry into human cells. The antibodies developed by the immune system act against this spike protein to prevent infection.

PVP director Ofer Levy said the team is testing known and new vaccine adjuvants, which were discovered by screening human cells. “For the testing, adjuvants are cheaper to make compared to the spike protein. We can make effective vaccines with lower amounts of costly spike protein, which is important when you plan to produce millions of doses of vaccine,” he said.

PVP already has an ongoing project for the elderly through the US National Institutes of Health (NIH). “We were screening small molecules with a focus on influenza and have a biobank of elderly white blood cells. We have been given permission to shift our focus to coronavirus,” Levy said. 

The blood samples of the elderly patients were provided by Lindsey Baden, director of clinical research at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, Levy said. The samples were from relatively healthy people aged above 65 and followed at the out-patient department. 

Levy said the elderly are most at risk from Covid-19. “The immune system of the elderly is distinct. It is harder to get a protective vaccine response in the elderly compared to healthy middle-aged individuals. Therefore, we are working on a vaccine tailored for the elderly,” he said.

The research is being funded by the USNIH, specifically the National Institute of Allergy & Infectious Diseases (NIAID).

Dr David J Dowling, PhD faculty member in the PVP and co-lead of the coronavirus vaccine effort, said the first mice have already been inoculated with a similar coronavirus spike protein derived from the Sars-2003 coronavirus — with and without a lead adjuvant combination — to get an early read on the antibody response. 

The timeline for clinical application of these studies depends on the adjuvant identified and its path to clinical trial, but is anticipated to be some months to a year. 


