Varanasi: US woman, four of 13 suspects test negative for coronavirus
2020-03-12
VARANASI: Five of the 13 persons, including an American woman, who were admitted to the isolation ward of the Banaras Hindu University hospital after showing flue-like symptoms, were discharged after their samples tested negative for coronavirus on March 7. The test reports of others are awaited. 


BHU spokesperson Rajesh Singh said, “A 48-year-old American lady was admitted to the isolation ward of the newly-built superspecialty block of the hospital on March 6. Her throat swab was collected for test. Before coming to Varanasi, she had visited China and Russia with a 35-member group. The samples of three other members of the same group and a local youth who visited Italy were collected on March 7 and sent for test.” 

The reports of the American woman and Italy-returned youth were found negative, after which they were discharged on March 7. The samples of three more persons, including a 12-year-old girl from Ahmedabad and two women from Mau district, also tested negative and they were also discharged on March 7, he said. The others in contact with the US woman were not admitted. 

Five more persons, including one each from Azamgarh and Rohtas, Bihar, were examined on March 9 and two locals and one from Ghazipur district were examined on Wednesday for showing symptoms and admitted to isolation wards, while their samples have been sent for testing. 

BHU hospital has made all arrangements to handle suspected coronavirus cases. A 10-bed special isolation ward has been set up and separate arrangements have been made in OPD. Nurses and paramedical staff have been trained to handle suspected cases. 

Chief medical officer Dr V B Singh said, “ There has been no confirmed case of coronavirus in the district so far. Five nodal officers have been appointed in urban areas and seven in rural areas in the district to keep a vigil on suspected infection cases. The nodal officers report to the CMO by 5pm every day. Apart from BHU hospital, isolation wards have also been created at Pt Deen Dayal Upadhyaya District Hospital, Pandeypur, and Divisional Railway Hospital, Lahartara.” 

An isolation room has also been created at Lal Bahadur Shastri International Airport. 

The CMO also appealed people to avoid crowded places and meeting tourists from affected countries for prevention of virus spread. He also asked private hospitals to report any suspect cases immediately to the district surveillance officer and additional chief medical officer Dr S S Kannaujiya on his number 9415830461. District magistrate Kaushal Raj Sharma said the situation is being reviewed regularly and proper arrangements have been made for screening of visitors from WHO-identified countries.


