Chandigarh administration asks telecom operators to keep track of home quarantined
2020-04-03
CHANDIGARH: To keep an eye on the home quarantined coronavirus suspects and patients, the Chandigarh administration has directed the telecom operators in the city to track their locations.


UT adviser Manoj Parida said telecom operators have been directed to track the locations and in case of any violation, strict action would be taken under the law.

Sources said the UT administration had received various suggestions like the Karnataka model, where a quarantined person has to send a selfie every hour to the government, but the administration finalised this method. 

Besides, UT administrator VP Singh Badnore also held a review meeting with senior UT officials and he was informed that necessary arrangements among three hospitals, PGIMER, GMCH-32 and GMSH-16, have been made. The neighboring states have also been requested not to send any patients without consultation and consent of the PGI.

This has been decided to ensure that PGIMER, which has been declared as a dedicated Covid wing (Nehru Extension), can devote its energy and resources on fight against corona.

Dr Jagat Ram, director, PGIMER, said there was no shortage of funds for medicines and equipment.

MC commissioner KK Yadav said in addition to the existing eight companies that were doing home delivery of essential items, Swiggy has also been issued a permit for Chandigarh. He also explained the mandi decongestion plan.

Deputy commissioner Mandip Singh Brar said 43,569 food packets were distributed in Chandigarh on Wednesday. Nine langars have been started in different parts of the city through mobile vans, he said at the review meet. Several social organisations have come forward to assist the administration, he added.

‘Don’t stop supply vehicles’

UT administrator VP Singh Badnore directed the police department to ensure that vehicles carrying essential items were not stopped by them. The police authorities should ensure that operators of nine companies providing groceries, vegetables and milk were not harassed. 

Medical consultation through video calls

The administrator suggested that medical consultation through video calls may also be introduced in the city. He said the name and schedule of doctors be published so that patients could avail the facility without crowding the hospital in case of non-serious cases.

