Utilise lockdown period by concentrating on studies: DDPU
2020-04-10
Mysuru: Students should make use of lockdown period by concentrating more on their subjects rather than wasting time worrying about coronavirus, said GR Geetha, DDPU, Mysuru district.

“Owing to the postponement of English exam, they are not able to focus on studies, which the board fears would affect their overall pass percentage. The department is now planning to help the students by holding a few classes before holding exams,” she said.

“Students should focus on the subjects instead of worrying about coronavirus which may divert their concentration and hit preparations for the forthcoming entrance exams. I request students not to panic and make use of vacation to the maximum extent. They should concentrate on CET, NEET and other such entrance exams,” she said. 

“As there are no coaching classes in colleges, already many of the aided colleges are getting their students prepared through online teaching by expert lecturers. Tthe question papers are in treasury and once the minister gives his nod we are ready to go ahead with the exam,” added Geetha. CET was scheduled on April 22 and 23 but is postponed.

G Sridhar, founder of Deeksha, said: “Given that the competitive exams have been postponed to the last week of May (NEET and JEE), students can utilise this time to prepare to the best of their abilities. Major subjects like Maths, Physics, Chemistry and Biology typically have about 30 chapters each. Students can complete one chapter per day and still have plenty of time to revise and take extra mock tests”. 

“The best way to approach their preparation is to study a chapter with an end-objective in mind. Choose a chapter, study the chapter and then write a test on it to ensure comprehensive learning. Once all chapters are done, a student must do at least 15 mock tests. The present Class XII students have to make the most of the next two months to bring themselves to a level-playing field with students who are repeating the JEE and NEET exams,” said Sridhar.


