Uttar Pradesh government’s plan to save farmers from lockdown jolt pays off
2020-04-06
LUCKNOW: Farmers of the state are reaping benefits of timely measures adopted by the Yogi Adityanath government for their welfare. The 21-day lockdown declared by the government to check spread of Covid-19 had come as a rude shock for farmers whose rabi crop was ready for harvesting. In western UP, lakhs of cane-growers, who had prepared fields for sowing of saplings, too, were facing an uncertain future as they did not know how to reach their fields as ban was imposed on the people's movement because of the coronavirus pandemic.


At this juncture, the CM intervened to extend a helping hand to farmers, especially those who are waiting for harvesting of the rabi crop. Yogi Adityanath’s foresightedness and his agriculture minister Surya Pratap Shahi's experience in the field as he himself hails from a farmer family came as a blessing in disguise for the farming community.

The CM immediately contacted authorities concerned at the Centre and sought their permission for allowing farmers and agri labourers to work in fields. Not only this he also directed seeds, fertilizer and pesticide shops to remain open even during the lockdown.

Having over 2.50 crore farmers and over three crore agriculture labourers, Uttar Pradesh is predominantly an agriculture state. It is also the highest producer of foodgrains, milk and vegetables in the country. For the state farmers, who were facing huge financial losses owing to untimely rain and hailstorms in January and February, the lockdown had proved a double whammy.

However, the state government ensured that no restriction was imposed on inter-district and intra-district movement of vehicles carrying harvesting machines, said agriculture minister Surya Pratap Shahi.

Talking to TOI, the minister said that farmers were also afraid of catching Covid-19 and they were not going to fields. However, the agriculture department kept on convincing them that by maintaining proper social distance they would not catch any infection. Gradually, they, too, realised the point and now they were busy in the harvesting work, he added.

From the day one of the lockdown the Yogi government had directed police not to block the movement of farmers willing to go to their fields. The district administration had made it clear that no passes would be required by farmers and agriculture labourers, he added.

