Uttar Pradesh: CM forms panels to revive economy after lockdown
2020-04-13
LUCKNOW: In a bid to revive the state economy hit by the lockdown, chief minister Yogi Adityanath on Sunday announced setting up of committees for various sectors, including education, construction and health. 


The committees will start working from April 15, a day after the 21-day lockdown ends. While Yogi did not spell out any plan of extending the lockdown, he announced that the committees would start the normal functioning of various sectors. While deputy chief minister Keshav Maurya will head a committee to oversee construction work including expediting the work on various expressways, the committee headed by deputy chief minister Dinesh Sharma will look into the aspect of making educational curriculum online.



Likewise, the committee headed by finance minister Suresh Khanna woul look into revenue and revival of MSME and industrial sectors. The panel headed by agriculture minister Surya Pratap Shahi will address the problems faced by farmers. "This is a season of agriculture and requires urgent attention, especially on the harvesting front," Yogi said. He said the committee will also explore the possibility of combining agricultural activities with MNREGS, as also taking forward the mechanism of procurement of foodgrain with a guarantee to ensure minimum support price to farmers.


Govt puts focus on key sectors

The committee headed by health minister Jai Pratap Singh will protect the medical personnel by providing them Personal Protective Equipment, besides training them to fight the Covid-19 pandemic.The committee headed by Jal Shakti minister Mahendra Singh will monitor drinking water supply. “As the temperature rise there would water crisis, especially in regions like Bundelkhand. That needs to be resolved,” the CM said. “PM Modi has emphasised on ‘Jaan bhi, jahaan bhi’. We not only need to stop the spread of coronavirus but also revive the normal activities as well.UP government would follow the guidelines of the Centre which is important for benefit of 23 crore people of the state,” Yogi concluded.

