Uttar Pradesh: Covid-19 casts shadow over panchayat poll
2020-05-02
LUCKNOW: The novel coronavirus-induced lockdown that has struck a blow to economic activities across the country, is also set to hit the grassroots-level democracy in the state. Any decision by the government to extend the lockdown beyond May 3 would jeopardise elections to nearly 59,000 village panchayats in UP. 

With the term of village panchayats ending on December 15 and the state machinery needing at least sixmonth's time to meet various formalities, the government would have no option but to appoint administrators to look after the panchayats. Moreover, if elections to village panchayats are delayed, it would have a direct impact on the block and zila panchayat heads' elections, again forcing the government to appoint administrators to oversee developmental projects in villages. 

The election to village panchayat heads, popularly known as 'pradhans', was held in March 2015. At that time, too, because of delay by the then SP government in creating new village panchayats, administrators, who are none but the blocklevel bureaucracy, had taken over. 

Talking to TOI, a senior officer of the State Election Commission (SEC) said that they needed more than six months to prepare for panchayat elections. The work related to revision of rolls in case of partial delimitation cannot be completed overnight, he said adding that “while the roll revision exercise takes at least five months the commission needs over a month to gear up the state machinery for conducting the elections.”

 The SEC officer said if this exercise would not start in the first week of May it would not be possible for the commission to conduct panchayat polls before December 15 paving way for administrators to take over. With over 11.50 crore voters, this time the election for pradhan posts would be held in about 58,500 village panchayats. After that by March 2021, elections would be held for block chiefs and then in the third and final phase the zila panchayat heads would be elected. 

In 2015, the village panchayat elections had lasted for 84 days and were held in eight phases. This time, chief minister Yogi Adityanath has already issued directives for reducing the election time to 45 days and it would have to be completed in four phases. 

The government has decided to cut short the poll process because it needs time to put the state economy back on tracks. It may be noted that following the announcement of panchayat elections model code of conduct is enforced forcing the government to defer development projects. 

