Uttarakhand govt recommends Centre to extend lockdown, 30% salary cut for MLAs
2020-04-09
Dehradun: The state cabinet, chaired by chief minister Trivendra Singh Rawat, on Wednesday decided to send a recommendation to the central government to extend the ongoing lockdown that is scheduled to end on April 14. 

State urban development minister and government spokesperson Madan Kaushik said that keeping in mind the rise in number of Covid-19 cases, the state government is going to send a request to the central government to extend the lockdown. Notably, the total number of positive cases in the hill state as of Wednesday was 35.

Besides, the cabinet also gave its nod to reduce the salaries of MLAs by 30 per cent. Additionally, each MLA would contribute Rs 2 crore each to the CM’s Relief Fund through their respective MLALAD funds. 

“Leaving aside the Jamaat members, we have seven coronavirus-positive cases in Uttarakhand, out of which five have been treated and discharged. However, once Covid-19 positive cases of Jamaat members started coming in, the number went up. The state is making its best possible effort to check the spread of Covid-19 and lockdown has played a crucial role in it. Therefore, the state cabinet unanimously decided to recommend the Centre to increase the lockdown period. We have not suggested any timeframe for the lockdown extension but have left the decision in the hands of the Centre. We will follow the guidelines as directed by the Centre,” Kaushik said. 

Kaushik added that the second major decision which the cabinet took was to reduce the salaries of legislators by 30 per cent. “While the legislators were getting a salary of Rs 35,000 per month, for ministers it was Rs 45,000 and Rs 90,000 a month for the chief minister. The Centre has directed a salary deduction for the MPs. We will follow that format and also follow the Centre’s guideline for the period it has to be deducted,” the minister added. 

The cabinet further gave its approval to a proposal, which recommended that each MLA will give Rs 2 crore from his/her MLA Local Area Development (MLALAD) Fund to the Chief Minister’s Relief Fund. “At present, an MLA is getting Rs 3.75 crore per annum as MLALAD fund - Rs 1 crore would be given through this year’s fund and Rs 1 crore from the next financial year fund,” Kaushik said. 

The total amount provided by the 70 MLAs in a period of two years would be Rs 140 crore, which would be deployed to fight Covid-19. “Whatever amount is left in CM’s Relief Fund will be used to improve the health services of our state,” the minister said. 

Kaushik added that the government’s efforts were oriented towards keeping the disease in check. “Villages have been quarantined and people who have shown Covid-19-like symptoms have been kept in institutional quarantine. Till Wednesday morning, 1,468 people were under institutional quarantine. We have requested Jamaat members to come forward for medical attention. However, if we find anyone hiding facts about their travel history, or their health, we will act strongly against them,” he added.


