Vadodara reports city’s first death due to Covid-19
2020-04-03
VADODARA: A 52-year-old Covid-19 positive patient, who had travel history of Sri Lanka, passed away in Vadodara on wee hours of Thursday morning. According to hospital authorities, the patient died at around 3.45 am on Thursday morning.


The Nizampura resident was the third patient who was admitted at the isolation ward of state-run SSG Hospital and had tested positive of the virus on March 19.

Vadodara district collector Shalini Agrawal said the patient had developed symptoms on March 16 and was admitted at SSG Hospital on March 19. 

This is the first death of a COVID-19 positive patient in the city since the outbreak of the deadly virus.

Four family members of the deceased including his wife, daughter, son and daughter-in-law got a last glimpse of the body inside the isolation ward wearing protective gears. His family members had also tested positive and are currently undergoing treatment at the SSG Hospital.

The deceased had travelled to Sri Lanka with a group of family members and friends. In fact, of the nine who have tested positive in Vadodara so far, six belong to the same group or had come in close contact with those who had travelled.

“Since, four of them are negative, we cannot allow them to go near the positive case. But since they requested us to be allowed to see the body once before cremation, we allowed them to take a last look but only after wearing personal protection equipment (PPE) kit and with the same precautions that doctors take while interacting with positive patients,” said SSG Hospital’s medical superintendent Dr Rajeev Daveshwar.

Hospital sources said that the patient was already on ventilator for the past one week. Health of four other family members is, however, said to be stable with two of them already testing negative twice last week.

The body was cremated by a relative of the deceased along with hospital’s staff at the Khaswadi crematorium in Karelibaug maintaining all necessary precautions, while a police van escorted the medical team.


