Coronavirus: Vadodara sees highest one-day spike, 21 positive
2020-04-10
VADODARA: Vadodara witnessed the highest one-day spike in number of Covid-19 cases on Thursday after 21 people tested positive, taking the total number of cases to 39 since the outbreak of pandemic. 


District collector Shalini Agrawal said that majority of the cases have surfaced after the mass sample testing of residents in densely populated Nagarwada-Saiyedpura area. The mass samples were collected after first positive case was registered in Nagarwada on Sunday when a 54-year-old male had tested positive. After this, there has been spike in number of cases from the area which has been declared a containment zone and mass sampling has been carried out.

Nagarwada alone accounts for 29 of the total 39 cases, said Agrawal. All 39 patients being treated at GMERS Medical College and Hospital at Gotri .

After four tested positive in the day, the numbers jumped by 17 who were confirmed infected late on Thursday. 

A doctor, resident of Mughalwada area, who has tested positive had come in contact with the 78-year-old Covid-19 positive patient from Godhra who was admitted at a Waghodiya Road-based hospital on March 31. The Godhra man had tested positive and later succumbed at another private hospital, which is also located on Waghodiya Road.

The hospital has been closed down with immediate effect while the health officials of VMC have directed the hospital management to completely sterilize the premises. 

Hospital administrator of the multispecialty hospital said after the Godhra man tested positive, all the seven members of the medical team, involved in his initial treatment, were kept under quarantine at government facility on Ajwa Road. Samples of all the seven were taken of which only one – that of the doctor – tested positive.

Three others from Nagarwada who have tested positive are the ones who had come in close contact with the deceased. With three new cases surfacing from Nagarwada area, the total number of positive cases from the densely populated area has touched 12.

 Mother of a 20-year-old boy, who had tested positive on Wednesday, has also been admitted as a suspect patient.

