Valley of Flowers to not open as per schedule on June 1 due to Covid-19 threat
2020-06-01
DEHRADUN: The Valley of Flowers National Park — a UNESCO world heritage site located in the upper reaches of Garhwal — will not be opened for tourists from June 1 as was earlier scheduled. The decision has been taken in view of the Covid-19 threat. It is for the first time in the recorded history of the valley when it won’t be opened for tourists on the due date.

Speaking to TOI, forest minister Harak Singh Rawat said, “Before we take any final call on our protected forests, sanctuaries and reserves, we would first consult with wildlife experts and scientists. We are not opening the Valley of Flowers to avoid the threat of transmission of Covid-19 to the animals there. They must be protected from the virus as well.”

The minister added that before reaching any decision regarding the opening of Valley of Flowers for tourists, the Uttarakhand government will consider Centre’s lockdown guidelines that will kick in post June 8. “Our decision on opening of Valley of Flowers will be based upon the directions from the Centre regarding national parks, wildlife sanctuaries, and tiger reserves and the suggestions of scientific experts from Wildlife Institute of India and Forest Research Institute,” added Rawat.

Nested in the lap of western Himalayas, the valley is open for tourists from June 1 to October 31 and remains snow covered in other months. Last year, it was visited by more than 15,000 tourists and the state forest department earned Rs 27.60 lakh from the visits.

Notably, the pristine valley undergoes a pre-opening ritual every year in the month of May in which snow and weeds are cleared from the tracks for visitors but the processis still underway this year. “We removed polygonum, commonly known as knotweed, from around 60 hectares last year. This time, our target is to clear 100 hectares but the valley is still covered with snow at some places as it received the last snow spell on May 21,” said Brijmohan Bharti, range officer of Valley of Flowers.

Meanwhile, the forest officials have cleared internal routes of the valley for patrolling as there is a potential risk of poaching. “Our staff members are patrolling the park despite a snow layer. However, the park can’t be used by tourists yet,” added the range officer.

Interestingly, the camera traps installed by the forest department in the valley have captured images of monal and musk deer this year indicating the rich biodiversity of the valley. 

The valley is known for its vast variety of alpine flowers as well as rare and endangered animal species like snow leopard, musk deer and Asiatic black bear. It was discovered by British mountaineer Frank S Smythe who stumbled upon the beautiful alpine meadows of the valley after losing his way while returning from an expedition to Mount Kamet in 1931.


