Valsad hospital trains docs, nurses to fight Covid outbreak
2020-04-13
SURAT: True to its mission of service to humanity, Shrimad Rajchandra Hospital (SRH) at Dharampur town in Valsad district is at the forefront of the fight against Covid-19 pandemic. Not only its doctors are training frontline staff of government hospitals in combating Covid-19, the trust associated with the hospital is donating medical equipment too.

Shrimad Rajchandra Love and Care (SRLC,) an initiative of Shrimad Rajchandra Mission, Dharampur, which runs the multispeciality hospital, has been inspired by the teachings of Shrimad Rajchandra, the spiritual guru of Mahatma Gandhi. SRLC has so far donated masks (1,5000), biosuits (500), sanitizer (400 litres) and beds (100) to government hospitals in Gujarat and other parts of the country. SRH doctors have trained approximately 66 government doctors and over 50 nurses too. 

"We have taken steps to equip, train and protect healthcare professionals and paramedical staff of hospitals that are battling the virus. In association with Government of Gujarat, we are distributing personal protective equipment (PPE) and helping institutions to build medical infrastructure for treatment of patients,” Dr. Bijal Mehta, a member of one of the trusts associated with the hospital, told TOI. 

"It is crucial to boost manpower and equip doctors with the knowledge of using these amenities correctly for treatment of Covid-19 patients. Owing to their expertise, SRH doctors are not only training other doctors to treat early symptom patients, but also providing advanced incubation and ventilation training to government doctors for treating critical Covid-19 patients. They have also been training doctors and paramedical staff to monitor ventilators correctly and different techniques of incubation. Our expert doctors have trained 66 government doctors and over 50 nurses so far. Government of Gujarat has designated SRH as a first referral unit (FRU) in Valsad district,'' Dr Mehta, an ophthalmologist, said. 

In order to help poor people from nearby tribal areas, SRH, which was set up in April 2003, continues to accept emergency cases and those of deliveries.


