Visakhapatnam may see surge in Covid-19 cases, fear doctors
2020-05-12
VISAKHAPATNAM: Worried about a possible rise in Covid-19 cases after mid-May, doctors involved in treating positive patients say that the city as well as the country will have to gear up to handle an increased number of cases. 

According to medical experts, the three reasons for the rise in Covid-19 cases in Vizag are opening of liquor shops, the gas leak at LG Polymers which led to people moving out in large numbers as well as protests. Social distancing and safety aspects were not followed and the after-effects may be visible within a week.

They also pointed out that stranded Indians who are being brought back to the country may also carry the virus. Flights and ships carrying some of them will arrive in Vizag and Tirupati airports soon and a few may test positive during their quarantine.

Speaking to TOI, director of Visakha Institute of Medical Sciences Dr K Satyavaraprasad said, “The first peak in Covid-19 cases will be after the middle of May and the second wave may hit us in June-July. From next week, Vizag is likely to see a spate of Covid-19 cases. Between May 4 and May 9 social distancing norms and safety measures were not adhered to by thousands of people during liquor sale and due to the industrial mishap at Venkatapuram. The effects may be seen after 5-7 days.”

Doctors warn that if several thousands or lakhs of cases surface by June-July, it will be difficult to accommodate so many patients in hospitals. “It may so happen that even if all the hospitals are opened up for Covid-19 patients, space may still be inadequate to house say 20,000 or 50,000 patients. Therefore, the treatment will have to change depending on the situation and the number of cases in the coming days. The mild cases will have to be contained at home and only critical and co-morbid patients would be treated in hospitals,” said Dr Satyavaraprasad.

Dr Devi Madhavi, head of the department of community medicine at King George Hospital said, “Even if the lockdown ends, people should continue to wear masks, maintain social distancing, hygiene, avoid social gatherings, and also avoid eating or ordering outside food as those cooking, packaging or handling the food can be coronavirus carriers. Protect the vulnerable, especially the elderly and children through self-isolation at home.”


