Varanasi records two new Covid-19 cases, Chandauli its first virus death
2020-05-31
Varanasi: Chandauli, which was the last district of the state to open its account of Covid-19 case on May 14, registered first death due to infection while two new cases in Varanasi, Ballia, Ghazipur each and one in Mau district came to light on Saturday.

District magistrate Chandauli Navneet Singh Chahal confirmed, “A 30-year-old native of Amra village in Dhanapur block of district died at SSL hospital of BHU in Varanasi during the course of treatment. He had returned from Nasik in Maharashtra on May 15 and on becoming symptomatic he had been admitted to ICU of BHU hospital on May 27. He is survived by parents, pregnant wife and three children, who were being examined in contact tracing process.”

DM Varanasi Kaushal Raj Sharma said that BHU laboratory issued 171 reports in which a 67-year-old native of Badi Piyari locality, who is a retired government employee, was found infected. On suffering many complications, he had gone to BHU hospital voluntarily when his sample was taken. A 44-year-old man of Pragya Nagar colony in Lanka area, who works as lab technician of community health centre Aurai in Bhadohi district, has also been tested positive. Sharma said that after becoming symptomatic he had given his sample in Bhadohi and returned home in Varanasi. When the lab test report was received in Bhadohi he was also found infected.

Now, total Covid-19 positive cases in Varanasi reached to 168. Of it 111 have become cured and discharged from the hospital while four had died. Total active cases in the district have become 53, he said adding, with the including of Pragya Nagar and Badi Piyari in the list of hotspot areas the number of hotspots in the district has become 87.

In Ballia, the total number of Covid-19 positive cases reached to 42 with the detection of two new patients, said DM Ballia Hari Pratap Shahi. 

In Mau district, a youth of Majhwara Mishrauli area, who had returned from Mumbai with his friend on May 15, has been tested positive. DM Mau Gyan Prakash Tripathi said that the sample of this youth had been taken on May 24. As apart from staying his residence after returning from Mumbai he had also gone to the place of his in-laws in Sodasar village of Kopaganj area all his family members as well as in-laws have been quarantined. Total cases in Mau has reached to 23 now. 


