Varsity chief medical officer offers free service to cops, covid warriors
2020-04-29
Mysuru: While several private clinics and nursing homes stopped functioning in Mysuru fearing close contact with coronavirus-infected patients, the chief medical officer of University of Mysore Dr MS Basavaraj not only continues to offer free consultation at the varsity’s health unit, but has also opened doors to the general public. 

Basavaraj, the chief medical officer (CMO) and the Covid-19 nodal officer of the varsity, did not not shut the clinic for a even a single day after the outbreak was reported, showing the way to fight the pandemic.

The varsity’s health unit currently functions without its aged as well as group ‘D’ employees. It has the support of lab technicians and nursing staff. Business as usual continues here with all precautionary measures intact. 

“Of late, the unit which is mainly for varsity students, employees and retired staff has also opened its door to public owing to prevailing situation due to the pandemic. Few police personnel too visited the clinic and obtained free medical aid previous week,” they said. 

What inspired Basavaraj to run the health unit is the dedication of hundreds of pourakarmikas in the city who work without adequate safety gear to keep cities clean amid the fight against Covid-19. “They’re tirelessly working to ensure the city is clean. While we the have opportunity to work under some degree of protection by wearing protective gears, they do not,” he said. 

“On an average, nearly two dozen patients of all age groups visit the clinic everyday as against 80-90 patients before the outbreak. Numbers have come down with the students vacating hostels. However, we have regular patients with diabetes, hyper tension, asthma and cardiac related ailments. We also have a dispensing unit that caters to our monthly requirement,” he added. 

Recently, 17-year-old twins, both PU students, who visited the clinic with complaints of fever were diagnosed with dengue and were hospitalised following advice. 

“We are very cautious about patients visiting the clinic with fever and other flu-like symptoms. We don’t allow them to spend much time at the unit either,” he added 

With the capacity of medical facilities around the country stretched by the surge of Covid-19 patients non-coronavirus patients are finding it difficult seek care. Speaking to TOI, medical superintendent of KR Hospital Dr BL Nanjanjundaswamy said, “The OPD block is completely non-functional at the facility. We are, however, attending emergency cases. OPDs are mostly overcrowded. On an average we receive 1,800 out patients everyday, but now it has come down to around 100. 

“We’re ensuring services at all Public Health Centres to facilitate public,” said district health officer Dr Venkatesh.

Deputy commissioner Abhiram G Sankar had recently appealed private medical practitioners to start running clinics to avoid causing inconvenience to patients.

Cops may visit varsity clinic 

Varsity CMO Dr MS Basavaraj has offered free service to police personnel who work round -the-clock to ensure strict implementation of lockdown regulation.

IMA urges pvt clinics to function

Indian Medical Association Karnataka chapter vice president Dr MS Jayanth has urged its members to run clinics. “However, some have expressed difficulty owing to staff issues and infrastructure. But nevertheless private hospitals have to function as usual and take necessary precautions,” he said. 

----- 

Photo caption 

University of Mysore chief medical officer Dr MS Basavaraj shows the way to fight novel coronavirus 


