Vegetable vendors in Aligarh pelt stones at cops enforcing lockdown; 1 hurt
2020-04-23
Agra: A clash broke out between police personnel and a group of vegetable vendors in the UP’s Aligarh on Wednesday over enforcement of lockdown in the district. A group of vegetable sellers in the city’s Bhujpura area clashed with the police and pelted stones after they were asked to remove their carts at the expiry of the relaxation hours at 10 am. One cop was injured.

The district administration has given a four-hour relaxation in the lockdown and allowed limited sale of essential commodities between 6am and 10 am. However, enforcing the lockdown after expiry of the relaxation hours has not been easy. 

In one such incident, local residents claimed an 18-year-old vegetable vendor was beaten up by the cops for violating the lockdown a few days ago in Aligarh’s Jalalpur area. He succumbed to his wounds on Wednesday.

Following the clash on Wednesday, district magistrate CB Singh said that no vegetable vendor would be allowed in the area from Thursday and residents could buy vegetables from the Numaish ground area, which is around 5 km from the city.

He said an FIR has been registered against 34 named local residents, mainly vegetable vendors, for allegedly violating lockdown rules and attacking policemen on duty. All of them have been booked under sections 307 (attempt to murder), 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life), 271 (disobedience to quarantine rule), 336 (endangering life or personal safety of others), 332 (voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty), 147 (rioting) of IPC along with section 3 of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, and sections 51 and 53 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 at Kotwali Nagar police station. 

Superintendent of police (crime) Arvind Kumar said, “A few vegetable vendors started fighting among each other at the time of closure of shops. When the policemen intervened to pacify them, they were attacked by the former.” He added that the vendors started pelting stones on the cops, injuring one of them.

Meanwhile, the family of Love Kumar, the 18-year-old vegetable vendor who succumbed to his injuries on Wednesday, placed his body in front of the Jalalpur police chowki and refused to cremate him till action was taken against the policemen.

Later, administrative and police officials assured the family that action will be taken against the culprits following a probe.

“The body has been sent for postmortem and further action will be taken on the basis of the report. The victim’s family members have not produced any evidence so far in support of their allegations,” SP (city) Abhishek said. No FIR was registered till the filing of this report.


