Pune: Vegetable & fruit prices soar amid panic-buying in wake of lockdown
2020-03-24
PUNE: Panic-buying and short supply triggered a 25-50% rise in vegetable and fruit prices in various parts of the city on Monday.


Residents said potatoes and onions were being sold at Rs 50 per kg in the retail market on Monday, while tomatoes were available at Rs 40 per kg and above. Prices of the leafy vegetables recorded an increase of Rs 5-10 per bunch. “And they were not fresh either,” a resident said, adding that a bunch of coriander was being sold at Rs 20 against an usual selling price of Rs 10.

Imran, a vendor from Shivajinagar, said the wholesale market was closed for three days, which was the primary reason for less supply in the retail markets. “On Monday, we were expecting fairly good supply. However, the traders at the wholesale market told us that supply was 40% less than expected. This primarily caused the price rise. Wholesale rates were also up by 20%,” he said. 

Shivajinagar resident Meena Kamate, who buys vegetables at a local vendor, said though she got what she wanted, there was very less variety in the market. “Vendors are saying that they purchased the vegetables at higher prices from the wholesalers and that’s why they were selling them at a higher rate. Also, some of the stock was not fresh as the vendors did not get fresh supply in the last three days,” she said. 

The short supply prevailed in the Kothrud, NIBM Road and Vishrantwadi areas, besides Paud Road and Bavdhan. “After the Janata Curfew on Sunday, most of the shopowners preferred to buy less than their usual quota from the wholesale market,” a retailer said.

Sangeeta Kadam, a vendor from the Mandai area, said the roadside vendors kept their shops shut for the last few days. “This has created an impression that there is a shortage,” she said. 

Fruits and vegetables were easily available at some vendors around the Deccan area. Even some convenience stores also started selling vegetables in the area to the benefit of the citizens. As a result, people stepping out to make purchases waited in line for their turn to buy whatever they needed.

“I stepped out to buy vegetables this morning and could get most of what I had to buy. Buying vegetables is taking slightly longer than otherwise as we have to wait for our turn but we are getting everything. The prices too have increased slightly, but I believe that is due to heavy demand,” a resident of Prabhat Road said. 

A resident from the Ahmednagar Road area said fruit prices were up significantly. “I bought a watermelon at Rs 150 and Ilaichi banana at Rs 100,” the resident said. 

Besides, almost half the shops in the city also downed their shutters on Monday with customers queuing outside shops, disregarding the 1-meter distance parameter of social distancing, sources from the Pune District Retail Traders’ Association said.

“Stocks were in short supply by Monday evening, with products like packet milk, bread and cigarettes being unavailable at many stores. I tried to find instant noodles at four shops and got them from just one of them. Meanwhile, two shops in my area did not have powder milk, something that does not happen often,” a resident of Deep Bungalow Chowk said.


