Veggie markets a problem, people not serious about Covid-19: EPS
2020-04-29
CHENNAI: As the state continues to grapple with an increase in the number of Covid-19 positive cases, chief minister Edappadi K Palaniswami on Tuesday expressed anguish over people’s lack of understanding about the severity of the infection.

He was speaking to bureaucrats of 12 coordination committees set up by the government, a day after taking part in a video conference convened by Prime Minister Narendra Modi with chief ministers. “In corporations like Chennai, Coimbatore and Trichy, the problem lies in vegetable markets. No matter how much you tell people, they refuse to follow them (lockdown restrictions). They are playful,” the chief minister said. On Tuesday, of the 121 fresh cases reported, 18 have been identified as “primary” infections and not from “contacts”.

Pointing to the huge death toll in countries like the US, Italy and Spain, Palaniswami said people of those countries did not realize the severity earlier. “As the death toll increased, they adhered to the norms laid down by the governments and now the deaths have come down. There are media reports about countries starting to lift restrictions,” he said.

Exuding confidence of containing the spread in the initial stage itself, the chief minister sought the support of public. “Else, even if it contained in the world, it would be unstoppable in the state,” he said, instructing police and local administration departments to create street-wise awareness using speakers. Senior officers including director general of police J K Tripathy and Chennai police commissioner A K Viswanathan attended the three-hour long meeting in Secretariat.

Insisting that personal hygiene was the key to combating the virus, besides social distancing and avoiding large gatherings, Palaniswami reviewed among other things the prevalence of cases, the projections, delivery of PDS and issues of guest workers, and said police personnel should be engaged on a rotational basis to reduce the burden of the workforce.


