Covid-19 scare in Delhi: Vendors’ woes multiply by the day as losses mount
2020-03-19
NEW DELHI: The informal sector in Delhi is fighting a battle for survival in the wake of threat of the novel coronavirus. As the city seems to virtually shut down to contain the spread of Covid-19, daily vendors are left in a lurch, with businesses being severely impacted.


Coronavirus in India live updates

These vendors, who mostly comprise migrant populations from neighbouring states, say their earnings have gone down by at least 50%, forcing them to reconsider their lives in the city. They sell a variety of things along road sides – books, earrings, pens and clothes – but most of them have reported similar losses. When TOI visited major markets on Wednesday afternoon, stalls bore a deserted look.

“This is a death knell for our business. Even GST and demonetisation did not impact us to this degree. If we earned Rs 100 earlier, now it’s difficult to even make Rs 10,” said Ankit Sharma, who sells men’s t-shirts by the roadside in Connaught Place. He took over the business from his father recently, after the latter had run it for over 20 years. “We may have to let go of our two workers to sustain ourselves,” Sharma added.

Even so, Sharma’s family is one of the lucky ones as his father had been able to build a house with his savings.

Sharma, whose father built a house after years of saving, is among the lucky ones. For other migrant vendors who pay monthly rents for their accommodations, the possibility of going hungry is more imminent than the threat of the virus. Living on the margin with daily earnings, they are left with very few choices. And most of them are rationing food money to save for their next month’s rent.

“We have decided to eat as little as possible otherwise we will be forced to go back to our village, and there are no jobs there,” said Surendra, a 30-year-old, who sells mobile covers in CP. The youth is the only earning member in his family, and lives in a rented house in Paharganj.

The community says that slump in business has resulted in loss of income that will be impossible to compensate. Vinod, who sells earrings outside Lajpat Central Market, said that on most days last week, he did not sell anything. “Shoppers are not stopping at stalls,” he said.

Another challenge, Vinod said, was to sell at profit. “We can’t bargain at all. Right now, our only concern is to get back the money we have already invested in our product,” he said.


