Kochi: Vets postpone elective surgeries due to lockdown
2020-04-17
KOCHI: Elective surgeries and doctor appointments have either been postponed or cancelled by veterinary doctors in both government and private veterinary hospitals in Ernakulam due to Covid-19.

Doctors perform only emergency surgeries like caesarean on pets and domestic animals and attend only life-threatening cases. Government veterinary centre situated near Durbar Hall ground witnesses eight to 10 surgeries on pets and domestic animals on normal days.

“We perform most of the surgeries on dogs, cats and goats at this hospital. Now we have postponed all elective surgeries including sterilization on animals. When we receive call from people who tell us about the symptoms of minor disease, which do not require hospitalization at this juncture, we tell them the name of the medicine they should buy from nearby medical shops for domestic animals and pets. We perform only emergency surgeries. Currently, only one doctor and staffer have been visiting the hospital,” said a doctor at government veterinary centre in Ernakulam.

The move is to ensure social distancing in hospitals and to make sure people stay indoors. 

“Elective surgery is one of the categories where we can postpone the procedures. Routine health check-up, grooming and other small procedures can also be postponed. Now-a-days we attend only emergency surgeries and casualty and that too after ensuring 45-minute-long interval between each case. As the government veterinary hospitals in nearby areas are not functional, more people with cats and dogs, which demand doctor’s consultation, approach us during the lockdown. We only allow one case at a time,” said Dr Gokul V, veterinary doctor at Animal Medical Centre, a private hospital in Angamaly.

Animal lovers also do not encourage people to take animals to veterinary hospitals unless it’s an emergency. “There is no problem in postponing certain surgeries, which are not life-threatening. We have taken three to four stray dogs to hospital as they required a doctor’s attention. We have been advised to take the pet animals to hospitals only on emergency conditions, says Aswni Prem of Oneness, an NGO working for stray animals in the city.


