Kolkata: Victoria, Indian Museum shut down amid coronavirus-spread fear
2020-03-16
KOLKATA: Victoria Memorial Hall and Indian Museum along with two popular science museums Science City and BITM were shut down on Saturday as authorities became increasingly jittery over the large crowds they attract, including a sizeable number of foreign tourists that have become a pariah in the times of the novel coronavirus crisis. 



Coronavirus cases in Kolkata


Rabindra Bhavan, housed in Uttarayan at Visva-Bharati in Santiniketan, had already closed down earlier along with Kala Bhavana that houses many Fine Arts faculty and has many priceless artwork displayed inside. 

 
 
The museum closures in the city come in the wake of similar shutdowns in Europe. Staff at the Louvre in Paris forced the museum to close following fears over the spread of Covid-19 after the French government banned large gatherings. In Italy, too, sweeping shutdown included the Vatican Museums, Galleria Borghese in Rome, and the Uffizi in Florence. In Venice, François Pinault’s private museums, the Palazzo Grassi and Punta della Dogana are also shut.

Jayanta Sengupta, curator of Victoria Memorial Hall, was the first to take a call on the closure. He said the decision was prompted by concerns about safety of both staff and visitors to the marble edifice. “We get around 150 foreigners daily. Though we had taken measures like providing masks to the staff and hand sanitizers at multiple points, we were uneasy as the security had to conduct manual frisking of 12,000-13,000 visitors daily. On March 11, I had written to both the cultural ministry and Raj Bhavan. The nod to shut down the facility arrived on Saturday evening,” said Sengupta.

This is the first unscheduled closure at VMH in a century. The VMH had opened in 1921. The shutdown will be reviewed on March 31 and either lifted or extended, depending on the scenario. 

The VMH closure also prompted Indian Museum authorities to follow suit. Though they, too, were in a dilemma, director AD Chaudhury was also aware that a closure could negatively hit people’s psychology. “I was in two minds but decided on the closure because we can’t take chances,” he said. Over 70,000 visitors had been to the museum since February 1, including 2,500-odd foreigners.

Indian Museum that is 206 years old had shut for a month and a half in 2013 for renovation ahead of the bicentenary celebrations. 

Chaudhuri, who is also the director general of the National Council of Science Museums, issued shutdown notices for Science City and Birla Industrial & Technological Museum (BITM) as well. 

“In view of the evolving situation on spread of Covid-19 and following the advisory of the Union health ministry, Science City Kolkata will be closed to visitors from March 15, 2020 to March 31, 2020 or until further notice,” Science City director Subhabrata Chaudhuri said. Incidentally, Science City was among the first to launch an awareness campaign on the novel coronavirus through a special exhibition on February 7. The panels were also showcased at BITM. 

