Victoria’s Covid-19 makeover a logistical challenge
2020-03-23
Bengaluru: Chief minister BS Yediyurappa, on Sunday, announced Victoria Hospital will be a dedicated Covid-19 facility, but it might take some time to implement the decision given the logistics involved. Three high-level meetings were held during the day to thrash out the details.

Yediyurappa, however, did not refer to his government’s earlier decision to convert an unused BBMP hospital on Broadway Road, Shivajinagar, into a dedicated Covid-19 facility. However, the Broadway Hospital has to set up from scratch and that too will take time. 

Yediyurappa said the dedicated facility at Victoria Hospital and all its annexes will have 1,700 beds. The chief minister said the government is set to extend support to shift all in-patients who are presently undergoing treatment to other facilities. But doctors and medical education department officials, under whose jurisdiction the hospital falls, said that they will not shift patients who are critical and will continue to treat them, but they will not admit fresh patients.

However, Victoria Hospital is the nerve-centre of public healthcare in Karnataka. The campus also houses a trauma care centre, PMSSY superspecialty hospital, Institute of Nephro Urology, Minto Eye Hospital and Vani Vilas Hospital dedicated to maternity and pediatric issues. The hospital’s 50-bed burns ward is one of its kind in the state getting up to a dozen patients every day.

Jawaid Akhtar, additional chief secretary, health and family welfare department, told TOI a plan has been drawn up to establish exclusive hospitals to treat Covid-19 patients and they will be rolled out. “A detailed action plan for Victoria Hospital is being prepared and will reveal it in one or two days,” Akhtar said.

Dr PG Girish, director of medical education and special officer, PMSSY hospital, said, “Victoria Hospital henceforth will admit only emergency patients who are in need of critical care. Other patients will be diverted to other hospitals where facilities are available. The intensive care unit and burns ward will continue operations as usual.”

He said that for a week now they have been reducing the number of intakes at Victoria Hospital by diverting patients to other facilities.

“In some cases, if required, we have also considered shifting patients to private hospitals for treatment. The government will pay for the treatment,” said deputy chief minister CN Ashwath Narayan.


