Vidarbha records highest four deaths in a day, 52 new Covid-19 cases
2020-06-09
NAGPUR: For the first time since the Covid-19 pandemic outbreak in Vidarbha, the region reported four deaths in a day on June 8. All the deceased were below 50 years old. Two of them were from Akola, with one each from Nagpur and Amravati.

With 31 positive cases in Nagpur, total 52 new Covid-19 cases came from Vidarbha region, taking total to 2,318. On the other hand, 39 patients recovered and were discharged, taking total to 1,558. The recovery rate of Vidarbha stayed above 65% (67.21%).

Two of the four deaths were reported in Akola, including youngest among Monday’s victims — a 36-year-old woman. She was admitted to GMCH Akola on June 2 and tested positive the same day. A 45-yr-old man from Naigaon in Akola also died in the isolation ward early Monday morning. He was admitted on June 3. Both patients had severe comorbidities. Akola also recorded eight new cases on Monday, taking total to 821 – highest for a Vidarbha district. Akola accounts for 39 of total 82 deaths in Vidarbha.

In Nagpur, a 42-yr-old man from Sheikh Bari Chowk in Hansapuri, who was admitted on June 1 and tested positive on June 2 died during treatment on June 8. A patient of chronic kidney disease, he was on ventilator support from 2 days. With this, Nagpur’s death toll reached 15. City also recorded 31 new cases taking total to 739, including 464 recoveries.

In Amravati, a 50-year-old woman patient with severe acute respiratory illness (SARI) died on Monday morning in Covid hospital. Her swab samples were taken four days ago and tested positive the same day. With this, Amravati reported its 17th Covid death. Six patients recovered and were discharged while five new patients were admitted to the Covid hospital. Amravati has total 284 cases, including 191 discharged and 17 deaths.

Buldhana continued to report new cases from rural areas. On Monday, five new cases, including four women and a man from Malkapur and Motala towns were reported. This took total cases in Buldhana to 90. 

By late Monday night, report of one of the close contacts of Mahagaon Covid-19 patient in Yavatmal district tested positive, which took total cases to 159. With 122 discharged and three deaths, total active cases in Yavatmal are now 34. Washim reported no new patient and the condition of three patients admitted there is stable. 

In Gadchiroli, one more man, a migrant labourer coming from Mumbai tested positive on Monday, taking total number of cases to 44. But, with four patients discharged on Monday, total 31 have recovered. Gadchiroli has 12 active cases at present.

A patient from Bhandara recovered early on Monday morning and a new patient tested positive in the afternoon. Due to this, the total cases in Bhandara surged to 42 but the active cases remained stable at 17. 

Wardha, Gondia, Chandrapur and Washim reported no new cases. In fact, 4 patients were discharged from Gondia. With this, 67 out of 69 patients in Gondia have been discharged and the district has only two active cases at present. 

AMRAVATI CASES at 284: Besides the 17th death, Amravati reported five positive cases to take the district’s count to 284. These include a 36-year-old woman of Kishor Nagar who allegedly came in contact with a Getlife Hospital positive woman. The other case is from Chawadi Chowk, Badnera, where a 28-year-old youth tested positive. This is the second case from Chawadi Chowk after a 50-year-old woman, who tested positive on Saturday last.

The Covid hospital today discharged six patients. This has taken the number of recovered patients to 191. 

Meanwhile, the collector told TOI on Monday that implementation of new guidelines regarding home isolation are not feasible at this stage in Amravati and he would continue with the current practice as most patients are slum-dwellers with very inadequate housing facilities. “If situation warrants in future, we may take a decision,” he told TOI.


