Hyderabad: Video calls & home prayers mark Eid in times of coronavirus
2020-05-26
HYDERABAD: Without embraces, handshakes and daawats, Eid-ul-Fitr celebrations across the city remained a low-key affair on Monday as people continued to remain indoors. Families greeted each other over video calls while prayers too were offered at home. 


Lanes in Old City, which would normally be bustling with people after early morning prayers, wore a deserted look as locals observed lockdown protocols. No prayers were offered in mosques as well as Eidgahs including Eidgah Mir Alam, Eidgah Bilali and Eidgah Madannapet as they were shut as part of the lockdown. Giving a miss to visits to relatives to share sweetmeats and greetings, families savoured Eid delights such as biryani, khichdi and kheema, sheerkhurma along with their immediate family members within the confines of their homes.



“My father has eight brothers. Every Eid, all brothers and their families come together. We host almost 50 to 60 people every year. However this year, we greeted each other on group video calls and offered prayers with only our immediate family members,” said Syed Faraz, a resident of Tolichowki. It was not just the lockdown that dampened the celebrations but also the severe heatwave conditions that kept people indoors. 

This Eid, many also came forward to help migrants and distressed people by offering them Fitrah. After Ramazan, it is an obligatory charity that is offered after the sighting of Eid-ul-Fitr moon. This charity is given by the head of the family on behalf of each family member. 

City-based NGO Helping Hand Foundation (HHF) served sheerkhurma at Government District Area Hospital, King Koti, and Government Nizamia General Hospital, both of which are Level-1 quarantine centres for Covid-19. 

“Most patients in Level-1 quarantine are contacts of primary and secondary positive cases and are required to undergo mandatory 14-day quarantine. As they cannot go home for Eid till end of quarantine period, we sent them sheerkhurma to make them feel better,” said HHF founder, Mujtaba Hasan Askari.

