Vijender Singh: I’m using the lockdown to teach my son gardening, hoping he picks it up
2020-05-16
Boxer Vijender Singh has been at home in Delhi for the last two months, ever since the lockdown began. The Olympic medallist and reigning WBO Asia-Pacific Champion says this is the longest he has been at home in one go in his two-decade long boxing career. “It has been a good break.
 Itna sukoon kabhi raha nahi hai saalon mein,” he says.

The break has enabled Vijender to spend more time at home with his sons. “I’ve been spending more time with them and we are all happy about that. Earlier, it used to be all about fights and travel, so I had little time at home. But now that I’m home, we are bonding,” he shares. In order to strengthen that bond, the boxer is introducing his older son Abir to activities that he enjoyed as a kid. He says, “I’m teaching him gardening. 
Mujhe shauq hai gardening 
ka and I’m hoping he picks that up. I grew up in the village where we used to work in the fields and had big gardens and farms. I’m used to being around greenery and doing manual labour in the garden, and I want him to have the same connect with his roots. We don’t want him to forget where he comes from, just because he’s living in the big city. The lockdown has given me a chance to ensure I can introduce him to that way of life.”

Vijender has also been ensuring he maintains his fitness under lockdown, something that is essential for his career. He says, “Workout never stops. I’m continuing with my conditioning, and I regularly shoot videos for some clients. That keeps me occupied for a large part of the day. Workout is easy, but shooting it just how they want is tricky.”

And when he is not gardening or shooting videos, Vijender is in front of the TV. He says, “I’ve been catching up on old Amitabh Bachchan movies. In fact, I’ve seen 'Don' multiple times in the lockdown. I even tweeted to Bachchan 
sahab, who was kind enough to reply.” The 34-year-old has also discovered a love for video games. “I love being on the Playstation. I have been spending time playing Uncharted 3. This is all the sports activity I am doing. 
Ghar pe baithe aur kya karein abb,” he laughs.

 News in BriefExplore BriefsWhile he has a comfortable life at home in the lockdown, Vijender realises how hard it is for many people. “It has been tough for many. We keep seeing the news and hear stories, too. I’ve tried to help people in whatever way I can,” he says, adding, “I want to give just one piece of advice to everyone – believe in God or have faith in something. That’ll give you strength to overcome tough times. I’ve practised this so I know what I’m talking about. Faith helps us get through tough times.”




