Villagers in hills start at dawn, trek for kilometers to get essentials amid lockdown restrictions
2020-04-17
Nainital: For several residents of Pilang, a remote village in Uttarkashi, it takes a trek of 14 kilometres, mule rides, a vehicle journey and a night stay in the district headquarters, to procure essential items such as salt, oil and sugar. With the nationwide lockdown extended and entering its fourth week, villagers in Pilang are a worried lot. Their stock of essential supplies is running out fast and the lockdown has made trips to the nearest market more uncertain than ever.

The situation is no different in the remote villages spread across both Kumaon and Garhwal regions of Uttarakhand. Many villages have no paved roads. While most villagers get grains such as wheat and rice from the government Public Distribution System (PDS), they have to make trips to the markets for pretty much every other necessity. 

Atar Singh, the gram pradan of Pilang (which is home to around 100 families), said that they are presently deputing one person from the village to make the trip to the nearest market every few days to get provisions for around a dozen families. “The deputed person reaches the nearest motorable road, books a vehicle and goes to the district headquarters. However, since the journey takes anywhere between five to six hours, the person has to stop for the night there and can only return the next day. The vehicle drops the person and the goods on the road and then we arrange for mules to ferry the goods to the village,” Singh said. 

Special permission is required from local authorities to book a vehicle and mules have also become scarce in Uttarkashi. “Almost all the hotels and guest houses are shut, so there is no place to stay for the night. I do have permission from the SDM for a vehicle but since mules are scarce right now, sometimes we don’t have any option but to carry the essentials up to the villages by ourselves,” Singh said. 

Like Pilang, residents of Kanar and Metali villages of Dharchula, Pithoragarh district and Poth village of Champawat district also have to make treacherous trips to the nearest marketplace.

Kanar has a population of around 1,000 and is 16 km away from the local market, Baram town, while Metali, home to roughly 1,200 villagers, is 5 km away.

“Due to the lockdown, essentials are available now only from 7 am to 1 pm. So villagers have to wake up at dawn to reach the shops in time. A young man takes three to four hours to reach Baram from Kanar, while an elderly person would take four to five hours,” said Jeet Singh, a villager of Kanar.

“With all eateries being closed because of the lockdown, the villagers also have to carry food with them,” Singh added.

“Horses and mules are available to carry loads, but the charges are Rs 500 per quintal. Villagers here are too poor to afford that,” said Narendra Singh, a resident of Metali village.

Pooran Singh of Poth had a similar story. “We have to leave before dawn because most shops are open only till noon and it takes us anywhere between three to five hours to cover the 17-kilometre-long journey to the market. Also, we cannot return the same day. After we get the essential items, we have to stop for the night and start the journey again the next day,” he said.


