Odisha: Villagers seal entry points to keep coronavirus at bay
2020-03-28
KENDRAPADA: As the fear of coronavirus continues to grow by the day, residents of Kendrapada district have set up checkpoints and banned outsiders from entering their villages.


“We have put up barricades on both sides of the roads in our village and set up 24-hour checkpoints in the fear that those returning may bring the virus along with them,” Sarbeswar Pradhan, the sarpanch of Gupti gram panchayat, said. 

Several villages have been sealed with makeshift road blocks and signboards saying, ‘Visitors are prohibited as a precaution against coronavirus.’

At many places, residents have also asked migrant workers, who returned to their villages recently from Delhi, Mumbai, Surat and other places to remain in home isolation and informed the authorities concerned about them.

Rasmita Sahani, the sarpanch of Satabhaya gram panchayat under Rajnagar block said, “We do not want others to visit our village until the situation limps back to normal. Around 120 youths of our gram panchayat have returned from Kerala, Punjab and Delhi recently. Most of them work as plumbers and in plywood factories. Many have come back in groups. Such people, who go to other states to seek work, often travel in groups. They sleep and eat together. If one of them contracts the virus, it can easily spread to the others. Therefore, we have advised them to stay in isolation in their homes on their return.” He added, We have also asked the villagers to inform us immediately if they find someone who has returned from other cities to their villages. We are also enlisting the names of all the migrant workers who returned from other states in the recent past.”

The barricades at the entry points will not only help prevent outsiders from entering the village, but also stop villagers from leaving. “We will allow some villagers to go to the nearby places to buy vegetables, fish and other essential commodities at best,” Kumar Swain, the sarapanch of Kurundi gram panchayat, said. 

When contacted, Narahari Sethi, the additional district magistrate (ADM) of Kendrapada said, “The arrival of a large numbers of migrant workers to their villages in Kendrapada district and its nearby areas from Kerala, Punjab , Delhi , Gujarat, Maharashtra and other states recently has exposed the locals to coronavirus as they returned without going through any screening. As a result, the local residents have put up barricades in their villages and are providing information to the district administration about the arrival of migrant workers in their villages”.

Mirza Babbar Beig, the additional district medical officer of Kendrapada said, “We are monitoring and screening the health of the migrant workers who arrived in the district. Health officials are preparing a database of the migrant workers with the help of the district administration. They will remain in home quarantine for the next 14 days. Authorities will take legal action against the workers under Section 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by the public servant) and 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life ) and 270 (malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life) of the Indian Penal Code and under the provisions of the Epidemic Disease Act, 1897 if they violate the lockdown order.” 


