Village locks itself up against coronavirus
2020-04-02
LUDHIANA: In a bid to protect their village from the outbreak of coronavirus, a group of villagers have set up their own checkposts at the entry and exit points in Shahpur village of Payal sub-division.


Barely 40km from the city, with a population of over 1,350, Shahpur has also taken a lead in taking other self-precautionary measures like awareness through public address system and sanitisation of houses.

Locals said more than 30 villagers have been deployed at about half a dozen checkposts at the roads leading to the village. “There are four roads that enter our village, including Kotli-Payal, Bhatta-Payal, Kadoon-Chankoiyan, and Maksoodra roads. When we heard about the spread of coronavirus in the state, we began to put up barriers at the entry of villages on these roads,” said village sarpanch Maldeep Singh.

Each barrier is being manned by two villagers, who thoroughly check the persons entering the village. “Only those who have emergency curfew passes are being allowed to cross through the barriers. All vehicles and their occupants are thoroughly checked. Those moving out of the village are also being allowed to go only if they have a genuine reason,” said another villager.

Locals maintain that those deployed at the barriers are specifically being asked to look for symptoms of flu and bad throat. It’s only after they find the person fit, are they allowed entry. Also, before allowing entry, the credentials of a person are also being verified from local contacts. “Only in case of emergency are the villagers allowed to go out. As of now, there is no patient in our village, and we are trying our best that everyone in the village remains unaffected,” said another local.

The villagers have also been using the public address system of two gurdwaras for making announcements twice or thrice a day, when they inform villagers as to how staying at home would help them fight against Covid-19.

Narinder Singh, who — along with a few villagers — has been spearheading the drive, said that at each barrier, volunteers have been taking proper precautions, while covering their faces with masks or handkerchiefs. He added that at the barriers, provision of a sanitiser has also been made.

Meanwhile, villagers are appreciating the move. “If we have to prevent entry of the virus into our village, it is necessary to take such steps. It is for the general good of the village, and we appreciate it,” said Surjeet Singh, a farmer.

Villagers said apart from putting up barricades at each entry and exit points, they have got a spray of disinfectant done in the village thrice in the past over a fortnight. This is to ensure that the entire village is properly sanitised, including drains, houses, and the village common place.


