Surat: Virtual diamond trade show is the new normal post Covid-19
2020-06-07
SURAT: Now, the sparkling diamonds manufactured in Surat will reach virtually to its customers across the globe in times of coronavirus pandemic that has put travel restrictions across nations.


To extend the limits of diamond trading in the new normal, industry’s first virtual diamond trade show has been organised by Surat-based Dharmanandan Diamonds Private Limited (DDPL) where the buyers will get a unique experience of viewing and inspecting the diamonds through virtual remote product inspection mode, which will give buying experience similar to buying physically. 

According to the company, this is the new technological development with the sole aim to upgrade retailers and revolutionise the way diamonds are purchased in the post-Covid 19 world. 

In the virtual trade show to be held on June 22, the company will allow the buyers in any part of the world to inspect each and every diamonds virtually from 360 degree angles. The technology, which is developed in-house, allows the buyers to view all minute details about the diamonds including the inclusions, carats, weight etc. The firm will use high resolution cameras to provide high definition quality video to the buyers sitting anywhere in the world.

Talking with TOI, Vipul Sutariya, director of DDPL said, “This virtual trade show is first in the world and will open the new horizon in virtual diamond trading. The coronavirus pandemic is rewriting the future of the diamond business and we are changing accordingly.” 

Sutariya added, “International travel is not recommended in most of the country and the physical trade shows and business meetings are uncertain for a longer period.” 

The global pandemic has taken sheen out of Surat’s diamond industry as many potential diamond consuming countries including US, UAE, UK and China are still in the grip of the deadly virus. 

Diamond industry analyst, Aniruddha Lidbide said, “Only technological innovations is the answer to change the way diamonds are traded. This virtual trade show will change the way industry is operating.”

Hitesh Patel, managing director of DDPL told TOI, “The virtual trade show will have features of one-to-one interaction and seminar sessions as well on the current scenario of diamond trade in the world.”

