Coronavirus not in air, Indore drive waste of money: Covid-19 team
2020-04-23
INDORE: From tankers to drones, Indore Municipal Corporation (IMC) is leaving no stone unturned in disinfecting public places and spending around Rs 75,000 to 1 lakh per day to prevent virus spread. But, experts termed the disinfection drive as ‘directionless waste of money’. 


“The virus does not stay in air. So, carrying out sanitization work on road or tree is just waste of money and time. To get better results, the solutions, which is prepared with proper combination of chemicals, should be used on floors inside house, tables, chairs, handlebars and stair-railing.., which are touched frequently,” Dr Jugal Kishore, member of Centre’s team said. 

Instead of spraying randomly across the city, the disinfectant solution should be distributed among people for use in households, he suggested. 

IMC health officer Akhilesh Upadhyay said the civic body has roped in total 52 tractors, 16 mist blowers, five pressure jets, 19 pressure tankers along with around 300 handheld machines to spray about 700 litre solutions on daily basis. About 500 workers are involved in spraying chemicals. 

Official sources claimed that around Rs 70,000 to Rs 1 lakh is spent per day in spraying the disinfectant. This excludes other expenses, like salary/wages of the workers. 

According to IMC additional commissioner Rajneesh Kasera, big vehicles and machines are being used to spray at outer surface of the houses including wall, gates and even vehicles parked there while handheld machines are being used to carryout sanitization inside houses of positive and suspected patients. 

“On regular basis, we are sanitizing graveyards, crematorium, offices, which are operational, ambulances and other vehicles through the solutions,” he said. According to IMC officials, there is no specific guideline as to where to spray the solutions and they are following general instructions in this regard. 

Experts claimed that the disinfectant could have been used in better ways if distributed among locals to disinfect the objects/places including tables, chairs, handlebars and stair-railing, which are touched frequently. 

Ratlam medical college dean Dr Sanjay Dixit said, “Effective way is to carry out sanitization inside the houses to kill the virus, rather than sanitizing outer surface of the buildings or on roads” 

