Covid-19 scare in Rajasthan: Kota coaching centres move online
2020-03-15
JAIPUR: For the first time in 30 years, the coaching centres in Kota wore a completely deserted look on Saturday following the previous night’s state government advisory against holding of classes till March 30 in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak.


The coaching town woke up with the news of the closure of coaching institutes. But by the time the institutes could call off the classes, thousands of students had already landed in their centres. They were immediately requested to go back to their hostels or accommodations and asked not to report until the ban is lifted. The coaching institutes said that they pre-empted the government advisory since the first case of an Italian couple tested positive for the virus in Jaipur last week.

By the evening, the coaching majors, which have over 1.5 lakh students from outside Kota, adopted the “minimal human contact-free coaching” methods and shifted their classes to the online platform, offering lessons and giving out assignments through WhatsApp, video conferencing and mobile apps to ensure “no loss of studies”.

“All major institutes immediately started working on preparing online modules to be broadcast on social media platforms,” said Pramod Maheshwari, director of Career Point.

At present, two groups of students are living in Kota: Those preparing to appear in JEE-Main slated in April and NEET in May; the others are those who are in junior classes and most of them preparing for competitive exams like Olympiads.

The initial hours were full of panic as the centres found it difficult to counsel students who were worried about the break in their preparation. The institutes started receiving calls from parents concerned for their wards.

“We have been telling everyone that the government has taken a precautionary measure to stop the spread of the virus which doesn’t mean that Kota facing any endemic. From the past 2-3 days, we have made thermal screening mandatory for every entrant in all our campuses including the staff and provided hand sanitizers at all possible places to reduce the spread of the virus,” said Nitesh Sharma, chief media and marketing officer, Allen Career Institute.

Students have now been asked to proceed to their hostels and follow all precautions. Considering the volume of students, the district administration has directed all major stakeholders —institutes, hostels, transport and food providers — to keep a watch on the students.

