Jaipur: Virus weighs heavily on weddings, hits business
2020-05-03
JAIPUR: It was a day of hectic activity. A big canopy was set up for the reception of the marriage-party. The front of the house was beautifully fitted with electric bulbs. Everyone was busy barring little Mehul. The eight-year-old girl was waiting for her mother, who promised to bring her a new white dress for her uncle’s wedding.

But little did she know at the time what God had in store. A sudden flow of tears welled up in her eyes and she blinked them away when her mother handed over the dress and said the function has been postponed because of self-isolation measures courtesy coronavirus.

Mehul had no clue what coronavirus pandemic actually means, which spoiled her week-long preparations and the function.

Her uncle Kishan and Shalini were to go through the nuptials at a banquet hall in Mansaovar on April 25 one day before the day the lockdown started.

“You can realise cancelling such an event means emotional and financial losses,” said the groom.

Covid-19 has cast a gloom on hundreds of such families across the wedding-crazy Rajasthan.

According to Babulal Chopra, owner of a garden in Mansarovar, the virus affected his business to the tune of Rs 50 lakh. Chopra has three gardens at the same locality.

“Not only me, the worst affected are the florists, caterers and event management companies, like the DJs,” he rued.

Like thousands of other families, Aarti Agarwal had to cancel her wedding and made it a point to limit group gatherings when they hold the function in future.

“The world has shifted to social distancing as a way of life,” said Aarti, who was supposed to get married on April 17 at Victoria Garden in Mansarovar. Acknowledging the emotions of numerous vendors involving in the wedding season, Aarti said it is also a major employment generator. “Each such event has scores of vendors and service personnel involved, from catering and decor to photography and makeup. And they don’t know when things will improve.”

The state’s Hotel and Restaurant Association president Kuldeep Singh is alleged to have said that the estimated losses is between Rs 1,000 crore and Rs 1,500 crore as tourism and the wedding industry are taking a beating.

The virus has had a knock-on effect on caterers. Most people have postponed their plans and the few, who are going ahead, have made it a smaller event.

“The industry is seeing a big blip in terms of revenue,” alleges the owner of Jai Ambey Caterers & Tent House in Mansarovar.

“We are helping the parties make the best out of the situation in these times of adversity, but ever since the virus entered their mental culture, it has become omnipresent, leaving us in the lurch.”


