Coronavirus alert for zoos and tiger reserves in Rajasthan
2020-04-07
JAIPUR: After the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) and the Central Zoo Authority (CZA) issued separate advisories on Covid-19 infection, the forest department sprung into action and is keeping a strict vigil on the big cats in the state. 


The move comes after a tiger tested positive for coronavirus at New York’s Bronx zoo, the first known case in the world. 

Chief wildlife warden Arindam Tomar said, “All the national parks and zoos in the state have been put on alert. Directions to monitor the health of the big cats have been issued.” 

The letter written by AIG NTCA Vaibhav C Mathur read, “ I am directed to inform that owing to the communicable and zoonotic nature of the said disease, following actions need to be taken to avert the disease in wild tigers in India.” 

The NTCA’s advisory for state also includes that tigers may be observed for symptoms consistent with Covid-19 such as respiratory signs of nasal discharge, coughing and laboured breathing through direct observation to the extent possible, besides through camera trap images for visible symptoms. A senior official at Ranthambore National Park said, “Any tiger, if it moves into human settlements which will be tranquillised and tested.” 

Jaipur zoo’s veterinary officer Arvind Mathur said CZA has advised it to remain on the highest alert, watch animals 24x7 including CCTV footage for any abnormal behaviour/symptoms. “Keepers/handlers will not be allowed in the vicinity without safety gear, preferably PPE (personal protective equipment), isolate and quarantine sick animals and have least contact while providing feed to animals,” he said. 

The letter also mentioned that carnivores, especially cats, ferrets and primates needed to be carefully monitored. Mathur said, “If any symptoms in big cats occur, we have been directed to fortnightly send samples of the suspected cases to designated animal health institutes to initiate Covid-19 testing, while following bio-containment and safety measures required to handle this high-risk pathogen as per the national/ICMR guidelines.”

