Maharashtra: Coronavirus fear keeps vehicles off roads, toll collection hit
2020-03-15
KOLHAPUR: The number of people travelling to and from the city has significantly dropped. According to officials in the state transport utility, the number of passengers has almost halved. There is hardly any traffic on the usually busy national highway 4. 


 Coronavirus outbreak live updates

Divisional controller of Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation, Kolhapur, Rohan Palange said, “The fear of coronavirus has taken a toll on our revenue collection. People are choosing to stay indoors and are postponing their travel plans. Places where the drop in passenger flow is conspicuous includes stretches from Kolhapur to Pune and Mumbai. We have cancelled 20% services plying on these routes owing to poor response from passengers.”

“The rate at which the virus is spreading is impacting our services. We are trying to make do with the available resources and cutting losses,” said Palange. 

Kini toll plaza, which witnesses heavy rush of vehicles especially over the weekends, when most people take the national highway to go to their hometowns, wore a deserted look on Saturday. 

“The numbers of vehicles on the roads has reduced drastically in the last few days. We rarely find any queue at the toll plaza these days. This has affected the toll collection at our booths. We are assuming there will be fewer vehicles on the roads in the next few days due to the outbreak of coronavirus,” said an employee attached with Kini toll plaza.

“We are asking employees working at the toll plaza to take precautions. We are asking them to wash their hands regularly and thoroughly as they take cash from motorists, which is the most contaminated carrier of virus and germs,” said the employee. 

Despite the weekend, only a handful of vehicles could be spotted on the roads in the city. Even the bookings in hotels and lodges have dropped. Even the vehicles queueing up at the pumping stations to fill petrol have dropped. 


