Virus won’t kill, being jobless will: Migrant workers
2020-03-31
JAIPUR: Kamal Singh is jobless and homeless but fearless. Tears roll down his cheeks, but there is still a spark of determination in his eyes. For the moment, he is not worried about coronavirus, the lockdown or even the sealing of inter-state borders. All he wants is to safely take his wife Jyoti Devi and 4-year-old son David to their Etawah home in Uttar Pradesh.

On a mission to cover a distance of 1,100 km, passing through three states — Gujarat, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh — they are still 400 km away from home.

A house painter at Chandoria in Ahmedabad who earned around Rs 12,000 a month, he along with his wife and kid have already covered almost 680 km from his workplace to Jaipur mostly on foot barring a few lifts in trucks and tempos here and there in the last three days.

Asked why he is crying, Kamal said, “I am worried about my son. He is just a kid and has to go through all this. I am not worried about myself. All that matters to me is the well-being of my wife and son. I have to get them home without harm. The virus won’t kill us, joblessness will,” said Kamal while talking to TOI at Adarsh Nagar.

He is aware that such a reverse migration could bring the pandemic from cities to villages where healthcare facilities are grossly inadequate. “We started from Ahmedabad at 10am yesterday (Saturday). On the way we took rides on tempos, small trucks and buses and walked the rest of the distance. We reached Jaipur this morning. Since 8am, we have been walking. From here, I will go to Agra and head towards Pali Khurd village in Etawah. We ate whatever we got on the way. If we manage to get any vehicle, we will board it…Let’s see…I am not left with a single penny,” he said inconsolably. 

The only saving grace was that they did not go hungry, thanks to various NGOs who are on the job of feeding thousands of migrant workers to their best of capacity.

“The lockdown snatched my job. I took a loan of Rs 1,000 from my contractor but now I am penniless and we are still around 400 km away from home. There were around 20 of us who were working as painters. All have left Ahmedabad,” he said.

“My kid has also been walking with us for miles. I want to carry him on my shoulders but I have a heavy bag which I need to carry. That’s our only possession. I just can’t hold my tears seeing my son trudge along with us with his tender feet,” he said.

Jyoti Devi is shattered too. She is worried on what the future has in store for them. “It was an okay job. We were happy and satisfied. I don’t know from where this virus hit us leading to this lockdown,” she said.

Like Kamal, her only worry is also about their son. “He has been walking without any complaints. Why is God so cruel,” she complained.

So what’s next? Kamal doesn’t have any answers. For the time being, getting back home is his only target. “Let’s see. I can’t tell you what’s in store,” he said.


