Bengaluru: Virus fear keeps haemophiliacs away from Victoria Hospital
2020-04-15
BENGALURU: Haemophiliacs are wary of visiting the blood disorder centre on Victoria Hospital premises because of the 100-bed dedicated Covid-19 facility set up at the Trauma Care Centre on the campus. Victoria Hospital is the only government facility in Bengaluru where haemophilia patients can avail treatment. 


Haemophilia is a hereditary genetic disorder that impairs the body’s ability to control blood clotting. Patients don’t bleed any faster than normal but can bleed for a longer time. Their blood doesn’t have enough clotting factor, which is a protein that controls bleeding. A serious disorder, it puts the patient at the risk of death due to excessive bleeding. The main treatment for severe haemophilia involves replacement of the specific clotting factor, which is taken from donated blood or through lab preparation. To get these factors inserted in their veins (similar to blood transfusion), the patients visit Victoria Hospital periodically. 

However, they are are not showing up. “The daycare centre hasn’t been closed even for a day, but patients are not coming,” said a senior doctor in charge of the unit at Victoria Hospital.

While haemophilia can’t be cured, patients can lead a near normal life through prophylaxis treatment. Prophylaxis is replacement of the clotting factor on a regular basis and helps the blood clot normally in case of an injury or bleed. The treatment prevents bleeding and joint destruction. 


Kolkata man’s death sparks worry

Patients’ groups are concerned about visiting Victoria Hospital as it houses the Covid-19 facility. The fear has only grown after the death of a haemophilia patient in Kolkata on April 6. The 34-year-old man had developed fever and was taken to the Covid-19 isolation ward in a hospital. 

It’s the patient was actually suffering from bleeding in the brain but it was mistaken for fever, rendering him a Covid-19 suspect. The man’s relatives, from a lower socio-economic background, had not disclosed he had haemophilia when he was taken to the Covid-19 ward. 

“The man was said to have got infected in the hospital and died. His swab sample tested positive for Covid-19 in the laboratory after his death. This case has come as a shocker for all haemophilia patients,” a haemophiliac from Bengaluru told TOI. 

Vikash Goel, president, Hemophilia Federation of India, said: “We have arranged for clotting factors at the Bengaluru chapter’s office in Mahaveer Jain Hospital and St John’s hospital. I suggest people with haemophilia don’t venture into hospitals for small bleeds that can be managed with ice therapy or painkillers.” 

