Virus couldn’t stop this mall guard from helping people
2020-03-27
Jaipur: This mall in Jhotwara is one of the biggest in the city. But for the last five days, this shopping arcade has been wearing a deserted look.

The mall, which on any other day is abuzz with hundreds of visitors, now has a handful of people who are looking to stock up essentials from the super market, the only store which is open.

Helping visitors load their items into their cars is Abdul Rahim, a 25-year-old guard. Most of the visitors thank him, not just for helping them but also continuing his service when the entire country is in a lockdown.

The strength of guards at the mall has been brought down to less than half. “I had a choice. My employer had asked me if I would like to stay home, but that would have meant a pay-cut. Moreover, somebody has to do this job. As far as I am physically fit, I would not want to sit back,” says Abdul, who admits that being the only earning member in a family of five, pay-cut was not something he could afford.

“I have two sisters and elderly parents to take care of. But seeing people, particularly the elderly, queue up and struggle for essentials, I am glad I am here and can help them in whatever small way I can. It feels nice when people actually compliment for my service,” he said.

Helping customers is not part of his duty, but Abdul likes doing that. When TOI was interacting with him, Abdul spotted an elderly couple with a trolley full of grocery items. He rushes towards them to help. “Itna saman hai, gaadi main rakhva ke aata hun (Lots of goods, let me help load it in the vehicle),” he said. The elderly couple was grateful for his help.

For the first three days of the lockdown in the state, Abdul walked 10 km from his home to reach the mall. “I did not have a vehicle pass then, so I had to walk in the mornings and again at night after a 12-hour duty. Cops had stopped me on a few occasions, but seeing my uniform and I-card they let me go.” he said.

Adjusting his mask, he added, “People are scared and puzzled. They will spend their time at home provided they get basic things including grocery, milk and vegetables. As the grocery stores are open and my employer needs me here, there is no way I will stay away from duty.”

Abdul always wears a mask and makes it a point to wash his hands several times a day. “I make it a point not to shake hands with anybody. After duty hours, I wash my hands and feet with soap before entering and head straight for a bath. Even dinner comes after that,” he said.


