Coronavirus fears: Delhi govt wants passenger vehicles sanitised
2020-02-22
NEW DELHI: With coronavirus spreading its wings as a global epidemic, Delhi government’s transport department has asked owners of all the passenger vehicles to keep buses, autorickshaws and taxis “disinfected” all the time.

The department has also asked the drivers to carry a self-certification stating that the vehicles they are driving are sanitised. The self-certification has also been made mandatory when these vehicles are brought for regular fitness tests at the transport department’s vehicle inspection unit.

While asking the drivers to spray “disinfectant” in their vehicles every day, the transport department has urged vehicle owners to ensure that seat upholstery, headrests, handrails, window locks, handles and other parts of passenger transport that are frequently touched by people, are properly cleaned.

Hand sanitiser must be available in theses vehicles, the order further stated.

The order has been issued by Anil Chikara, the motor licencing officer of Jhuljhuli’s vehicle inspection unit where school and contract carriage buses come for fitness certification once in two years.

Chikara said that all public transport vehicles must ensure that they are clean and sanitised. “Even clause 73 of the Delhi Motor Vehicle Rules – 1993 says that all passenger buses shall be disinfected once in two months and the owner shall furnish a certificate to this effect to the state transport authority. Since coronavirus is now spreading as a global epidemic, it should be our duty to ensure that these vehicles do not become the carrier of such infections and diseases,” he added.

Chikara further said that nobody is bothered about dirty seat upholstery, stains of hair oil on head rests, stained grabrail along the stairs of the buses and unclean floor of the vehicles. “All of us who travel in public transport and children who board school buses daily come in contact of these parts. The vehicle owners must clean them regularly as first step towards providing hygienic mobility,” added the expert on public transport.

According to an estimate, there are about 18,000 buses, over 90,000 autorickshaws and close to 55,000 taxis apart from a large number of e-rickshaws that ply in the national capital.

Chikara said he will soon talk to the officials of DTC and DIMTs, which run cluster buses, to ensure that those vehicles are also “disinfected” on a regular basis. More than 40 lakh people travel on these public buses every day. The enforcement team of the transport department will be asked to check if contract carriage and school buses are clean.


