Virus at doorstep, S Kol condo living on phone
2020-03-22
Kolkata: Speaking to next-door neighbours over intercom, passing instructions to service supervisors over the phone and inspecting disenfiction measures and housekeeping over video calls — that was how the neighbours of city’s second Covid-19 patient at a residential complex in Panditya spent the second day of their self-imposed lockdown. 

“Most residents in our complex are extremely cooperative and have been following the home isolation procedure with extreme seriousness. Not only adults, even kids have been made to understand the gravity of the situation and they are not coming out of their homes to play with friends in the common area,” said the president of the apartment owners’ association.

The condominium complex issued lockdown strictures on Friday morning after residents came to know that the virus had reached their doorstep.

Since Friday, they barred entry of outsiders, including drivers, maids and guests, and asked all residents to refrain from coming out of their homes for the next few days. In case of any illness, the residents have been urged to contact only the doctors available in the complex.

“Some, including some government officials, are insistent on moving out of the campus. The security guards are informing us the moment someone is trying to leave the premises and we are trying to dissuade them. But since we cannot force anyone, we are asking them to maintain the necessary precautions and while coming into the complex, wash their hands thoroughly,” said a senior resident. Residents said the complex is following a deep-cleaning and disinfection protocol and senior members are keeping tabs on that through WhatsApp video calls and CCTV cameras.

“Elevator buttons, lobby gates, staircase railings and all other places in the common area which are frequently touched are being thoroughly disinfected and wiped clean a few times a day. The security guards and the housekeeping staff, who are still outside, have been asked to maintain strict hygiene and wash their hands regularly,” said the association president.


