Virus increasingly affecting patients’ lungs, say doctors
2020-06-11
Coimbatore: Echoing district collector K Rajamani’s statement that the current Covid-19 strain was more stronger and virulent than before, doctors on Wednesday said the virus was increasingly affecting the patients’ lungs.Pointing out that the virus had infected the lungs of only 10% of 280 patients, who they treated before the opening of borders, doctors with the ESI Hospital said now the percentage of such patients has gone up to 50.Speaking to TOI, hospital dean Dr Nirmala said almost 50% of the patients was symptomatic and that most of their lungs were affected. “Out of the 35 patients undergoing treatment in the hospital, lung opacity was detected in 15 of them during the chest CT scan. And 20 of them have cold, cough, headache and body pain. Three of them also have mild to moderate breathlessness and require ventilation.” According to her, even symptomatic patients could find their lungs infected.The doctors said things were different in the previous wave of infections, when 280 patients were treated at the hospital. The patients were from the district and neighbouring Nilgiris, Tirupur and Erode. “Only 10% of them had changes in lungs and symptoms. While they had bronchial pneumonia, they didn't require ventilation. A few others had sore throat, dry mouth, body pain and easy fatigability. But it was much a smaller percentage,” said another doctor.Pointing out that the current batch of 35 patients were from different parts of the country, the doctors said patients from New Delhi, Mumbai and Chennai had severe symptoms, compared to those with no travel history or those from Bengaluru.A district administration official said, “The hospital had a patient from Chennai with continuous dry cough. But when they gave him steroids, he became better. About 90% of patients with breathlessness are from the above three places.”The doctors said every patient was subjected to CT scan of the chest and that the course of treatment was based on the virus’ impact on their lungs. “If there is pneumonia, we give them medicines based on their biomarkers and repeat the CT scan every five days, until the lung infection clears. We also ask patients to practice yoga and pranayama, among others,” said a doctor.