Bhubaneswar: Virus threat hits government school attendance
2020-03-12
BHUBANESWAR: The novel coronavirus (Covid-19) has not only spooked global markets but is also affecting parents, resulting in thin attendance in many government schools in the city. Unlike other states, the Odisha government is yet to announce closure of schools due to the possible spread of the virus and so many parents are reluctant to send their children to schools. 


“It is certainly a scary situation. Every day we are seeing reports of the disease spreading fast in India. Many states have announced early closure of schools. In schools, students are bound to come together. It is difficult to expect that they will follow the sanitation guidelines. So I feel it is better to keep my child at home,” said Namita Mandal, mother of two school-going children. 

While most of the private schools have suspended classes after the end of the final examination, in government schools, exams are scheduled start from this week for Class IX and next week for the rest.

Of the total 85 students in a government-run primary school in Unit-4 area, only 37 were present on Wednesday after the school reopened after a break of three days. It was a similar situation in most of the government schools in the city. 

Parents said, it is high time the government suspends prayers, daily assemblies and group competitions to prevent a large gathering of students. “Though no positive case has been detected in Odisha yet, but as a precaution the government should suspend school prayers and other mass gatherings,” suggested Ramani Ranjan Sahu, a parent. 

“Officially the classes are not suspended but since students have had a long weekend owing to Holi, the attendance seemed to thin,” said Sonamika Ray, headmaster of Capital High School. “We are taking all measures advised by the government to create awareness among students regarding coronavirus,” she added.

On Wednesday, the health and family welfare department has asked school authorities to identify students, teachers or any staff member suffering from cold or flu and showing symptoms of sneezing and coughing and advise them not to come to school. 

Besides, schools have been asked to keep furniture clean and sanitise items of mass use like doors, windows, computers, cupboards and so on. “All schools must use covered dustbins and make provision for water in toilets. The schools should also conduct regular health check-ups of students and staff in hostels,” health secretary Nikunja Bihari Dhal said here on Wednesday. 

