Virus paranoia aggravating mental health conditions
2020-03-25
Jaipur: Extensive coverage in the media of the spread of coronavirus pandemic globally and the number of fatalities, has led to many seeking help for mental health conditions. 

Psychiatrists in Rajasthan have been receiving phone calls from patients with a history of mental conditions complaining about anxiety they have been facing in the last few days, due to the spread of coronavirus. In times when people have been staying at home in isolation, many find themselves vulnerable in terms of mental health. 

Chitra Singh, psychiatrist at Sawai Man Singh Hospital, said that it is mostly the people above 55 years, who have been calling her. “We have stopped meeting patients in person due to the epidemic, but we are available on call. I have been receiving calls from the elderly as this virus affects them the most and they are facing anxiety and depression issues. Hypertension and high blood pressure are becoming common. They are feeling isolated sitting at home,” said Singh. 

It is not just the isolation, but a feeling of emptiness is hitting the patients as well. Senior professor of psychiatry and principal of Medical College Sikar, K K Verma said that many people are feeling that the world is going to end soon. 

“People with a history of depression, have started to feel that the world is ending and that we are all in danger, due to the discourse on social media . People are in a panic mode and not going out of the house is getting them more anxious. I have been advising my patients not to believe everything on WhatsApp. They need to divert their minds from the news and focus on positive energy,” said Verma. 

Doctors have been suggesting to develop a hobby to divert their minds from the outer world. It is better to read one newspaper or watch television news for a fixed hour. Doctors are trying to encourage people to do terrace farming, cooking, chat over phone or read books. 

“People should not get worried about the epidemic but just take precautions. Fix a time-table and do some exercise at home. Cleaning is a very good therapy so people should start dusting and cleaning the corners of their house that they have been waiting to find the right moment for. The phone calls are increasing and there is a possibility that the lockdown might stretch further, but that doesn’t mean more stress. Just stop reacting to all the social media and WhatsApp forwards,” said R K Solanki, head of psychiatry at SMS.


