Youngest Covid-19 casualty: Virus kills 20-day-old infant in Rajasthan
2020-05-03
JAIPUR: Covid-19 claimed the life of a 20-day-old infant here on Saturday. He is possibly the youngest to fall prey to the deadly virus across the world. Across the state, six persons succumbed to the disease, taking the death toll to 68. 

The newborn, who was brought to the government-run JK Lon Hospital in a serious condition on Friday, died within five hours. His test report came late on Friday evening and the health department announced it on Saturday morning.



“So far, the youngest to die of the virus was a 45-day-old-boy in Jamnagar of Gujarat. In Connecticut, US, a six-week-old infant had died who was the youngest in the world. The boy who died in the hospital was just 20 days old,” said Dr Ashok Gupta, medical superintendent, JK Lon Hospital, one of the biggest child specialty hospital in the country. 

The boy was rushed to the hospital from Chand Pole area around 4am on Friday. Since the infant belonged to the one of the hotbeds of the city, doctors conducted Covid-19 test. “He was suffering from diarrhea, vomiting, dullness, septicaemia and low grade fever. We started his treatment and put him on ventilator support by intubating him but his condition was serious and he died at 9am,” said Dr Gupta. 

Doctors suspect that he might have contracted the infection after his birth. “There is no evidence of vertical transmission of infection from infected mother to baby. No one in the family has tested positive yet,” said hospital officials.

It is not the first case brought to JK Lon Hospital with complaints of diarrhea and vomiting. A six-month-old baby was brought to the hospital with diarrhea and vomiting three days ago. He tested positive and is currently recovering.

A 55-year-old resident of Ramganj in Jaipur was rushed to SMS Hospital on Friday but doctors declared him brought dead. His samples were taken and he was found infected. A 47-year-old resident of Sardar Patel Marg in C-scheme, was brought dead to SMS Hospital on Friday, also tested positive.

A 76-year-old resident of Ramganj, who was brought dead to Mahatma Gandhi Hospital on Friday, also tested positive. Ajmer reported its first death when a 45-year-old resident of Nala Bazaar, who was admitted to JLN Hospital on April 25, died on Saturday. He was suffering from diabetes. A 67-year-old resident of Nagouri Gate in Jodhpur, who was admitted to MG Hospital on April 30, died on the same day. The health department officials said he had pre-existing coronary artery disease. 

With 106 more persons testing positive on Saturday, the total count of infected stands at 2772. The districts which reported the cases are Jaipur (33), Jodhpur (60), Ajmer (4), Kota (3), Alwar (2), Bharatpur (1), Chittorgarh (1), Pali (1) and Udaipur (1). After being cured, three patients were discharged from Mahatma Gandhi Hospital on Saturday. 


