Virus surges ahead: 19 positive cases reported
2020-06-09
Ludhiana: Nineteen patients tested positive for Covid-19 in Ludhiana on Monday.Two of them were tested at DMCH. They include a 35-year-old man and a year-old girl, both from Panache Homes, Omaxe Royal Residence, Pakhowal Road.Prem Gupta, DMCH secretary, said, “Of 72 samples sent for testing, 68 were from DMCH, two from Deep Hospital, one from government hospital and one from Fortis Hospital. The two residents of Pakhowal Road, who have tested positive, had walked into the OPD of DMCH on June 7 and their samples were taken.” Civil surgeon Dr Rajesh Bagga said, “In the evening, 50 pending reports were received from Rajindra Hospital, Patiala. Of them, 15 were positive and 35 negative.” The 15 include two men — a 28-year-old and a 25-year-old with Kuwait travel history. They had landed at Amritsar airport on June 1. They have been isolated at Meritorious School. Another case is a 40-year-old man from Vivek Dham, Noorwala Road. He works as a fruit arhtiya at Sabji Mandi. Fourth and fifth cases are a 42-year-old woman and a 13-year-old girl of Chawni Mohalla, who were contacts of a patient who died on May 29. With them, the cases from Chawani Mohalla have gone up to 18. Sixth case is a 48-year-old man from Vishkarma Colony who works in a pharma company at Kala Amb, Himachal Pradesh. A 30-year-old undertrial also tested positive. As many as 84 samples were collected from jail and reports of five were received, of which one was positive. A 32-year-old man from Kusht Ashram, Islamganj¸ who is driver of a positive patient and has travel history to Rajasthan, and a 30-year-old man from Dashmesh Nagar also tested positive.Besides, two women, aged 40 and 66, of Jalandhar have tested positive at Christian Medical College and Hospital.Six of the positive cases are from Khanna. They include two doctors — a 57-year-old man and a 54-year-old woman — and their two maids. They are contacts of a doctor admitted to Oswal Hospital. A 47-year-old man and a 29-year-old woman, contacts of the doctor couple from Khanna, too, have contracted the vitrus..SMO Dr Rajinder said, “With this, number of positive patients in isolation ward of Khanna civil hospital has gone up to 16.” DC Pradeep Kumar Agrawal said, “Three patients were cured and discharged from Mother and Child Hospital.” 