‘Virus fear’ spurs dhamaka cuts on chicken prices
2020-03-15
Vadodara: Desperation among poultry farmers go viral with messages like “Sunday dhamaka offer. Chicken 1kg live Rs 30 and cutting Rs 50 only!” being circulated on social media platforms which is being circulated widely along with picture of a healthy chicken and the address and phone number of the shop. 

Demand for poultry dropped drastically in wake of the Coronavirus scare.

While even the National Egg Co-ordination Committee (NECC) issued an ad in public interest claiming there is no connection between the chicken and the dreaded pandemic so far, such is the fear psychosis, that even avid meat lovers are avoiding the fowl.

The drastic fall in prices can be gauged from the fact that live chicken which was sold earlier for amount between Rs 140 and Rs 160 per kilo, was on Saturday being offered at Rs 35 by bigger dealers in the city.

Sarfaraz Qureshi, a chicken trader in the city, said: “Despite the glut in the market, we have cut down prices drastically to ensure that consumption goes up. Once people start eating chicken owing to low prices and find it harmless, we can then revise the prices later.”

Even poultry farm owners have pressed the panic buttons and are selling chicken at a much younger age and lower weight. “We used to supply 40-day-old fowls, which weighed around 2kg. Today, we are even selling month-old chicks weighing 1.5kg only. The demand has gone down to one-fourth of what it was before the outbreak,” lamented Faruk Patel, who owns poultry farms in Bharuch and Anand districts.

Patel pointed out that even the one-month-old chicken consumes around 2.5kg feed during the time it spends at the poultry farm. At a cost of around Rs 30 per kilogram, the chicken would consume feed worth around Rs 75 in the farm. “Leave the feed apart, we are not even able to take care of wages of workers from our sales,” Patel said.

Dealers believe that the aggressive pricing is already bringing customers back. “Today we managed to sell around 1,100 chickens against an average of 1,500 earlier. This is not bad considering the severe downfall in demand we witnessed in the past few days. The small shops were not willing to cut prices and sold high rates. We decided to get into retail sales on our own to push demand,” said Ahmedraza Qureshi, a wholesale dealer.

The dealers, however, fear that with poultry farms not rearing chicken in desired amounts the prices may become exorbitantly high once demand soars again.


