Virus may shave $6bn off hotels’ biz this yr
2020-03-20
Reeba Zachariah | TNN

Mumbai: India’s hospitality sector could see a revenue hit of about $6 billion this year, with branded chains accounting for a third of the losses. This would be the direct impact of the travel bans and spreading quarantine that have disrupted operations in the face of the Covid-19 epidemic. 

The sector — which entirely depends on travel, trade and tourism — has seen massive room cancellations this month. Upscale hotels in India’s political and financial capitals New Delhi and Mumbai are operating below 40% of their capacities. With companies in many coronavirus-affected countries, including India, adopting work-from-home and no-travel policies, the scenario looks grim for the hospitality industry in the immediate term. The sector is hoping the virus threat reduces by June or July and business picks up in the second half of the year.

Some global chains like Hilton are temporarily closing properties in coronavirus-hit US cities. However, in India, lodging players have no plans to shut down operations even as they stare at empty rooms and no check-ins.

“The large-scale cancellations of room bookings in recent weeks have eroded the ability of hotels to operate without piling up worrisome losses. The absence of new business on books is only adding to the grim story ahead,” said Achin Khanna, managing partner of consulting firm Hotelivate. “If normalcy does not return in the second half of the year, then 2020 will be the worst performing year for the hospitality industry since the 2008 financial crisis.” 

According to Hotelivate, branded hotels could lose about $2 billion in revenues this year — an erosion of over 30% compared to what was clocked in 2019. The lodging sector could see an additional revenue loss of $4 billion if bed-and-breakfasts, guesthouses and unorganised hotels are included. “We are seeing fewer guests. Occupancies have dipped by 30%,” said Fern Hotels chairman Param Kannampilly. “If the business situation worsens due to the outbreak, then we may be forced to close certain outlets.” Pubs, gyms, spas and swimming pools are already shut at Accor Hotels and other luxe chains after the government’s social distancing directive to slow the transmission of coronavirus.

Facing pressure, the industry has been pushing for relief from the government to stem financial loss and human toll. It wants the government to offer a moratorium on debt repayments and monetary support to contracted workforce. About 25% of the employees in hotel chains are contracted staff.


