Coronavirus scare: Refund rules relaxed by Indian Railways
2020-03-22
MANGALURU: Indian Railways has relaxed refund rules for tickets booked at the counter from March 21 to April 15, to prevent crowding and maintain social distancing in wake of the Covid-19 outbreak. If railways cancels any train from Saturday to April 15, passengers can now avail refund of tickets, across the counter, up to 45 days from the date of the journey, instead of the present 3 hours to 72 hours, stated a communique from South Western Railway.


If trains are not cancelled but passengers do not want to take the journey during the above dates, ticket deposit receipt for refund can be submitted up to 30 days from the date of journey, as against three days, which was the norm at stations. 

Passengers can also submit ticket deposit receipt, in the same scenario, for a refund at the office of chief commercial manager or chief claims officer’s office up to 60 days from the date of journey, instead of 10 days, which is the norm.

Passengers not wanting to travel can cancel by calling 139, and get refunds at counters up to 30 days, instead of before the departure of the train. These relaxations are to ensure that passengers can conveniently claim refunds later.


Trains cancelled

Konkan Railways, in the wake of an appeal by Prime Minister Narendra Modi for a Janata Curfew on Sunday, amid the Covid 19 crisis, has decided to regulate train services for the day. 

All passenger train services originating from 12am to 10pm on Sunday will not run. However, trains that are already running at 7am on the day will operate to their destinations.

Train 70102 Karwar- Pernem DEMU passenger; train 70101 Pernem-Karwar DEMU passenger; train 17310 Vasco Da Gama-Yeshwantpur bi-weekly express on Monday, March 28 and March 30 and train 17309 Yeshwantpur-Vasco Da Gama bi-weekly express on Sunday, Tuesday, March 29 and 31 will be cancelled. 

Southern Railway too has cancelled 42 express trains originating from Mangaluru Central, Mangaluru Junction, Kannur, Kozhikode, Shoranur, Nilambur Road and Palakkad Junction on Sunday.

