Virus reprieve: HC stays sale of Biyani’s pledged shares
2020-03-31
MUMBAI: In the first judicial order granting relief to a borrower hit by the coronavirus lockdown, the Bombay high court on Monday restrained IDBI Trusteeship and UBS Bank from selling shares of Kishore Biyani’s Future Retail. The shares were pledged by Future Corporate Resources (FCRPL) to secure the debentures issued by a group company Rural Fairprice.


A fall in the market value of Future Retail shares led to the pledge being invoked as the value had dropped to below what was required to provide security for the loan. The Future Group company has an outstanding loan of Rs 610 crore payable to UBS Bank. While the RBI had allowed borrowers to pause repayments for three months, loans against shares contain a clause allowing the lender to sell the pledged stock even if repayment is not due. 

The HC also directed UBS to withdraw any orders placed with brokers for sale of the pledged shares. Justice K K Tated said, “It is to be noted that when the debenture trust deed was executed, market value of the shares was Rs 350 per share and, because of Covid-19, the share market has collapsed and per share comes below Rs 100.” This is the first such order during the coronavirus lockdown, where the court took a view of commercial problems in an unprecedented market situation.

In 2018 and 2019, Rural Fairprice Wholesale (RFWL) had borrowed Rs 670 crore from UBS London branch by pledging shares of Future Retail, which were held by FCRPL, a group company. Both RFWL and FCRPL had approached the HC for urgent orders against March 17-18 notices for the sale of the pledged shares following the market crash in the wake of the Covid-19 shutdown.

 
 

Counsels Vikram Nankani, Vineet Naik, Somasekhar Sundaresan with Naik Naik Co for the Future Group company argued that Future Retail’s shares fell because of the Covid-19 outbreak and sought a stay from the sale until the markets settled down. Counsel Anirudh Hariani, Varghese Thomas and J Sagar Associates for UBS opposed any relief as the market value of the shares had fallen to Rs 350 crore compared to Rs 610 crore. “Considering the present situation of market and Covid-19, I am of the opinion that plaintiffs are required ad-interim protection till next date,” said the court. The next date falls on May 4.

“This is a pragmatic development where the court has kept in mind genuine commercial problems which have affected all businesses and industries in the unprecedented corona crisis, even in cases where force majeure (an act of God) may not be an agreed term,” Future Group solicitor Ameet Naik said later.

Nankani and Naik emphasised that the conduct of Future Group should be considered, as till date there was not a single payment default by them with respect to the debentures. Hariani, appearing for UBS, argued that the default on part of the Future Group company cannot be attributable to any force majeure event and that it was entitled to invoke the pledge and sell the shares in terms of the debenture trust deed.


