Virus cases in Gujarat mount to seven within 12 hours
2020-03-21
AHMEDABAD/RAJKOT/VADODARA: The number of Covid-19 cases in Gujarat mounted to seven in just 12 hours ending Friday noon with five more testing positive, even as the four major cities were preparing for a virtual lock-down to curb the spread of the virus.


In Ahmedabad, two women and a man tested positive while in Vadodara, an NRI businessman and a 62-year-old woman were confirmed infected. All these persons had a recent foreign travel history from Spain, Finland, Sri Lanka and the US, said Jayanti Ravi, principal secretary, health and family welfare. 

Even as reports of 34 people are awaited, 63 out of the 559 travellers who came to Gujarat on Thursday alone were put under quarantine whereas 492 were under home quarantine.

“Our priority is to ensure that the infection does not spread in community. So far, there are no cases of person-to-person contact and we are thus emphasizing on stringent quarantine of those who have come in contact with the persons,” Ravi said.

Civic authorities in the cities ordered shutting down of paan kiosks and doubled the fine for spitting on the roads to Rs 1,000.

On the lines of Maharashtra, Gujarat has also started hand-stamping on persons under quarantine from Thursday evening. “We had initially thought of wrist band, but we realized that it could be removed easily. We trust people, but we are getting instances daily of quarantine breach which is dangerous for public safety,” she added.

Meanwhile, the NRI, who has his business office and house in Spain, frequently travels between Vadodara and Spain. Before he was admitted in the isolation ward of SSG Hospital on March 17, he had travelled to Spain between February 27 and March 7 where his family resides. From Spain, the man had landed at Mumbai airport on March 8. After staying in Mumbai for two days, he had reached Vadodara on March 10. Officials said he had hired a taxi and travelled by road from Mumbai to reach Vadodara.

It was after six days stay in Vadodara’s Makarpura area that the NRI approached a private medical practitioner with complaint of fever. Later, he was referred at SSG Hospital 

“All his travel history and contact listing has been done. His condition is stable and 10 individuals who came in his contact have been quarantined,” Vadodara collector Shalini Agrawal told reporters.

The 62-year-old, a resident of Tandalja area, had landed at Chennai airport from Sri Lanka and had reached Ahmedabad airport. She reached Vadodara by road from Ahmedabad. She was kept in isolation ward at SSG Hospital on March 18 after she had symptoms of Covid-19.

Rajkot health authorities heaved a sigh of relief as most relatives of the 32-year-old man infected with Covid-19 after returning from Mecca tested negative. 

