Coronavirus claims 12 lives, highest single-day spike in Rajasthan so far
2020-05-06
JAIPUR: The state on Tuesday reported 12 Covid-19 deaths, the highest in a single day, taking the total casualty count to 89. While six persons died in Jaipur, three each succumbed to the virus in Jodhpur and Kota. Out of the 89 deaths in the state, 50 are from the city.


The deceased from the city include a 55-year-old resident of Khajpura in Dudu, a 38-year-old youth from Idgah Basbadanpura, a 50-year-old man from Basbadanpur, 61-year-old woman from Ramchandraji Ki Chokri of Badi Chauper, 30-year-old woman from Shiv Nagar of Murlipura and 20-year-old woman resident of Noorani Masjid area in Purana Jalupura area. 

In Kota, a 54-year-old-man from Indra Market Shripura, a 47-year-old resident of Kunhari Ladpura and a 48-year-old woman of Sindhi Colony of Gumanpura lost the battle to the virus. In Jodhpur, a 52-year-old man from Ghantaghar area, a 57-year-old from Darpan Cinema area and 55-year-old from Khetanadi Lal Bangla have died. Apart from 12 deaths, 97 persons tested positive across the state. The districts which reported the cases are Jodhpur (41), Jaipur (25), Chittorgarh (9), Kota (9), Tonk (2), Bhilwara (2), Ajmer (5), Alwar (1), Rajsamand (1), Jhalawar (1) and Bharatpur (1). The total cases in the state stand at 3158. 

In Jaipur, the areas which reported cases are Chandpole (4), Adarsh Nagar (3), Kishanpole Bazaar (2), Jaisinghpura Khor (2), Kalyan Nagar of Tonk Road (2), Ramganj (2), Glass factory on Tonk Road (2) and one each case was reported from Purana Jalupura, Madhvas colony, Bapu Bazaar, Civil Lines, Char Darwaza, Polo Victory area, Mansarovar and Purani Basti. With 29 districts out of 33 districts of the state reporting Covid-19 cases, the health department has decided to develop Covid care centre in all the districts. Health minister Raghu Sharma said they have started working on advance planning for providing treatment to suspected and positive patients outside the residential areas in all the disticts. 

The dedicated Covid centres will be equipped with all basic facilities. Each centre will have bed capacity from 500 to 1,000. The government is planning to keep patients in these dedicated centres who are asymptomatic or who have mild symptoms of the disease. According to the health department officials, 70% of the total cases do not have any symptoms or have mild symptoms. These patients do not require much care like the other serious patients. 

Currently, such patients are being kept in hospitals such as SMS Hospital, RUHS Hospital in Jaipur and in district hospitals and those attached to medical colleges. The health department has issued complete guidelines for the dedicated Covid-19 care centers. The health department officials said the centres will be developed in places such as hostel, hotel, dormitory, marriage halls or any other such places. The centres will be different from dedicated Covid-19 care hospitals. 

According to the guidelines, these centres will have facilities for drinking water, parking facilities, laundry facility, security, food and ambulances. The centres will be equipped with psycho socio support. Counselors will be deployed and means of entertainment will be made available. Also, prophylactic treatment of hydroxychloroquine will be provided to healthcare workers deployed at the centre. 


