Coronavirus hits travel plans in Delhi, leaving backpackers’ haven in despair
2020-03-13
NEW DELHI: It is well near impossible to take a relaxed walk through Paharganj in central Delhi. The area packs in tourists on a shoestring budget and walking there means weaving through an obstacle course of human beings from across the globe. On Thursday, however, there was a relaxed air in the usually crowded backpacker’s haven. The lanes looked uncharacteristically accommodating because there weren’t many people around.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

“Sorry, I have a bus to catch,” a foreigner in his 20s smiled. The smile did not hide the wariness in his tone. Like him, most masked tourists refused to talk to TOI. Those who did expressed keenness to leave the city. A Turkish family explained through a translator app that they were leaving Delhi on Friday. They didn’t want to be named or photographed. The travellers surely realise that they are as much at risk of infection by the novel coronavirus in their parts of the world as in Paharganj, but the travel restrictions announced by various countries, including India, must have been playing on their minds.

A group from Kazakhstan has been trapped by such restrictions. Vishal Narang, who owns a few hotels in the locality, told of the plight of the 25-odd Kazakhs. “Their flights stand cancelled till March 21. They were staying at Pearl Plaza hotel from March 5 but have run out of money. We are providing them food,” Narang disclosed. TOI tried reaching out to these stranded tourists, but they declined to talk.

A few, however, are enjoying their time in Delhi despite the anxieties. Russel Shakespeare, a resident of Brisbane, Australia, was nonchalantly ambling along with Sidney resident Michael Amendolia. The unmasked Shakespeare explained, “Unless it’s a P95 mask, there’s no point in wearing one. The only precaution we are taking is washing our hands and using hand sanitisers.” The duo came to India for two week and are returning home on Friday, having spent most days in Varanasi.

“I haven’t noticed anything yet to panic about,” Shakespeare said. Amendolia revealed that the two, both photographers, had been eating in dhabas to experience Indian food. “There are worse diseases we could contract,” the 57-year-old reasoned. “We are, of course, very careful about the general hygiene of the place where we eat.”

Ajay Kumar Aggarwal, president, Paharganj’s Hotel Mahasangh, said the panic and restrictions due to the Covid-19 pandemic had cut into their earnings. “This is a 100% occupancy season, but we are seeing not more than 20% occupancy,” Aggarwal said glumly.

Pawan Mittal, general secretary of the association, elaborated, “February and March are completely ruined. At this time, apart from tourists, importers, exporters and medical tourists arrive in Paharganj. Now the visa process is on hold till April 15 and even those who are here are hurrying home,” Mittal claimed.

Paharganj’s 800 hotels are jittery because the domestic tourist season in April-June too is likely to be hit. Bookings are being cancelled and payments are being held back. They are coping with the virus as advised. Mittal revealed that the hotels are sending daily reports to the municipal corporation: “Guests who came after February 15 are under the scanner, especially those who arrived from the virus-affected countries.”

At Shimtur, a popular Korean restaurant, manager Hari said all employees had been instructed to wash their hands frequently, though masks hadn’t yet been made mandatory. At Appetite German Bakery the staff use masks and hand sanitisers though there aren’t too many tourists eating there. Cleverly enough, Harish Kumar, who runs Minis Sports and Jeans, compensated for the slump in business by stocking masks and finding ready takers for them.

