Virus may delay polls in six municipalities
2020-03-17
Jaipur: The upcoming civic elections scheduled on April 5 in six municipal corporations, including Jaipur, are likely to be postponed due to the coronavirus pandemic. After a long tug-of-war between the state government and the state election commission, the directorate of local bodies (DLB) on the directions of state government will file an application in court on Tuesday requesting for postponement of elections.

For the same, legal opinion from additional advocate general was also sought on Monday. Directorate of local bodies (DLB) director, Ujjwal Rathore said, “The decision to file an application in the court for the postponement of elections will be decided at the state government level. We have explored all the possibilities at our end and will file, if directions are given.”

The government will also present cases of different states including Andhra Pradesh where civic bodies elections were postponed even after candidates filed their nomination.

Government sources claimed that the EC earlier stressed on conducting elections as no case of Covid-19 was found in Kota and Jodhpur. “On March 15, the DLB wrote a letter to the SEC demanding the postponement of elections. The department had cited letters from collectors of the three districts. But the commission sent its reply saying that the elections should be held on time,” said a source.

Jaipur collector Joga Ram and Kota collector Om Prakash Kasara on Saturday wrote to secretary local self government department (LSG) Bhawani Singh Detha urging him to reschedule and postpone the elections to the six newly formed municipal corporations, scheduled for April 5.

It was reasoned, during elections, the crowd will gather at one place. They also didn't rule out the possibility of the virus spreading with people using electronic voting machines (EVMs) and pressing the buttons with their fingers during the election. The collectors also stated that ahead of the elections, the public meetings and campaigns organised by political parties attract huge number of people. Also, the poll officials gather during the training sessions and attract a lot of crowd, they pointed out.


