Visitors from coronavirus-hit nations under watch in Himachal Pradesh
2020-02-11
SHIMLA: With death toll from coronavirus continuing to rise in China, Himachal Pradesh has put people arriving in the state from virus-affected countries under strict observation.


A list of 145 residents of the state coming from abroad was received from the government of India on February 3, after which district health authorities had put all of them under surveillance. While 46 persons have completed the mandatory 28-day observation, the remaining 111 are still under observation, including 12 additional self-reported four cases from Chamba and eight from Solan district.

Health and family welfare minister Vipin Singh Parmar said 10 persons, including two Himachalis and eight Chinese in Solan district, have self-declared about China visit, but none of them travelled to Wuhan city in China. He said all of them are asymptomatic and being observed by the health department for fever, cough or respiratory distress.

Parmar said a health outpost has been created at Primary Health Centre, McLeodganj (Dharamshala) with effect from February 1 for the benefit of visitors coming from China or any other Coronavirus-affected country.

He said three dedicated ambulances with personal protective equipment (PPE) kits earmarked are available in case of requirement for transportation of cases. Regular reporting is being done by all the districts and then final compiled report being shared with the Union government on daily basis.

The minister said said isolation wards have been identified at IGMC, Shimla and Dr RPGMC, Tanda. Isolation wards have also been identified at all the district-level hospitals from February 7 onwards. 

According to him, hoteliers have been requested through DCs for sensitization of visitors for self-declaration if any of the guests has visited China during the last 14 days or any time after mid-January.

Parmar said immediately after receiving an e-mail alert from the Centre, necessary advisory has been issued to all the chief medical officers of the state to take preventive and control measures regarding Novel Corona Virus.


