Visually impaired couple supports lockdown despite losing livelihood
2020-04-11
Nagpur: Ravindra Atram, 34, and his wife Shubhangi, 30, both visually impaired, may be facing an uphill task to arrange two square meals for themselves and their two-and-half-year-old son Shreyas due to the national lockdown but they still fully support the stringent measure as necessary to save the nation from Covid-19 pandemic.

Ravindra, an arts graduate with diploma in teaching, works as railway vendor to earn livelihood. The 100% blind man earned around Rs200-400 everyday selling earphones and mobile glasses on trains. 

Wife Shubhangi, who manages the household, has just 15% vision and is completing her graduation. She is trying to get a job too. Ravindra too has applied for jobs. The family gets an additional help of Rs2,000 through a government scheme per month that helps pay the rent for their Wanadongri home.

After having an arranged marriage five years ago, it was a struggling but steady life for the couple until Covid-19 shook it up. 

With trains stopped, the couple was on the verge of starvation, along with their son, when ‘police war room’ for addressing corona related issues received information abut them recently. Addl CP Nilesh Bharne asked NGO Mudraas Charitable Society to help the couple following which Akash Devangan and Saurya Shukla along with Hingna police reached their doorstep with enough ration for at least two weeks. 

Atram couple was among 3.57 lakh people who had received food packets and ration kits from police and NGO collaboration since March 22. 

Ravindra said they were in a difficult situation after realizing the ration was fast depleting. “The income stopped after the lockdown. We were discussing the crisis in the neighbourhood when someone informed police,” said Ravindra who used to earn livelihood with skills taught at the special school. 

Shubhangi said they had received ration kit but was worried about milk for son Shreyas that they could not buy for the last three days. “We are trying to give him regular diet,” she said.

Though the Atram family claimed to have some savings left with them, they felt it would be a tough going if the lockdown continues. “We know tough days are ahead but cannot expect lockdown to end without the pandemic ending. Our suffering is not bigger than national interest. Covid-19 should not spread anymore,” said Ravindra who also had visited the local Nagar Parishad to enrol his family’s name for rations. 

The NGO, which along with Hingna police, had helped the Atrams, is now contemplating arranging for Shreyas’s milk after TOI alerted them about the situation.


