Vizag was ready to deal with Covid before any other dist: Joint collector
2020-04-26
Visakhapatnam: Joint collector Lotheti Siva Sankar on Saturday said the district has so far successfully managed to keep the number of coronavirus cases under control. He attributed it to the support and cooperation of the public and government officials. On completion of a month of lockdown, Siva Sankar, who is heading key committees such as isolation and monitoring material, urged the public to continue their cooperation as home quarantine period has gone up to 28 days from 14 days.

He said since the first positive case was reported in Visakhapatnam on March 10, even before the lockdown was imposed, the district administration took steps to deal with the impending crisis. “We were prepared before any other district in the state and we detected Covid-19 cases early. The district collector acted timely,” the joint collector told TOI. “We should avoid mass gatherings, maintain social distance, and continue using masks. The district administration is working in a transparent manner and has been strict in its implantation of the lockdown,” he said.

Speaking about the initial hurdles, he said, the district administration in the beginning faced issues with supplying essential commodities, but it resolved those issues. “Twenty-two teams, including legal meteorology, vigilance and police, were set up to address price hike and artificial shortage created by traders. They registered 406 cases after inspecting 1,254 shops. We conducted meetings with wholesalers and retailers at regular intervals,” Siva Sankar said. Seventeen agencies were given permissions to door delivery. He added that every day, around 4,300 door deliveries are taking place and district officials put banana stock from Kadapa and Anantapur on sale in rythu bazaars and distributed some of them in shelters. 

The joint collector said the first two phases of free ration distribution witnessed 96% turnout and the third phase will start from April 29. For this, nine RTC buses were arranged for farmers including those in Araku. “Farmers’ produce should not be damaged as per the chief minister’s instructions. We have acted accordingly. The Anakapalli jaggery market was opened after the collector got a call on 1902 about the woes of jaggery farmers,” he said. 

District authorities have received 4,000 grievances so far, including 720 on their toll-free number and 3,277 on 1092. Around 99% of grievances have been addressed by the authorities. Siva Sankar said they are now focused on procurement of paddy and maize. They aim to procure 9,000 tonnes of paddy and 700 tonnes of maize, he said.


