VMC not to declare identity of Covid-19 patients from today
2020-06-01
Vadodara: As restrictions are being eased with what is being dubbed as Unlock 1, there is another concern. The Vadodara Municipal Corporation (VMC) has decided not to release names, address and even gender, age and areas of Covid-19 positive patients.

The medical bulletin of VMC released on Sunday evening stated that as per directives of centre and state government, details of the positive patients will not be released as it results in violation of privacy of patients and also leads to legal complications.

It mentioned that the civic body will continue micro-zoning, active screening and surveillance of new areas as usual.

VMC’s medical officer (health) Dr Devesh Patel too said that no details of the positive cases will be made public.

“We will share just numbers and analysis from time to time. We have been time and again directed not to make names and other details of the positive cases public,” he said.

When questioned regarding the safety of citizens who are likely to be more vulnerable with relaxations that begin from Monday, Patel said that citizens should increase usage of the Aarogya Setu mobile application which will continue issuing alerts.

“We will also continue our containment activity,” he said.

The discrepancies in official figures too are becoming evident. A clerk working with the academic section of M S University tested positive on Saturday. After this, the university has decided to close down head office for three days but like Saturday, the clerk’s name did not appear in the list of positive cases even on Sunday.

Meanwhile, the spike in Covid-19 cases continued on Sunday. “Officially”, the total number of positive cases in Vadodara reached 1,057 with 34 new cases being reported since Saturday evening and 42 persons losing their lives.

Three persons, including two from Mumbai’s Vile Parle (west) and one from Ahmedabad’s Vastral area, have also tested positive in the city.

As many as 25 persons were discharged in the city including three from private hospital, two from SSG Hospital, 16 from Covid Care Centre and four from home isolation.

As many as 616 Covid-19 patients have been discharged either from various facilities or home isolation even as 399 remain under treatment. Those under treatment include 14 on oxygen and eight on ventilators or BIPAP machines. The condition of remaining 377 patients is said to be stable or they are even asymptomatic.


