VOC Port tightens measures to prevent coronavirus outbreak
2020-01-31
Tuticorin: V O Chidambaranar (VOC) Port in Tuticorin has tightened safety measures to prevent coronavirus outbreak in China from spreading to India through sea. 

Chairman of the port T K Ramachandran has said that the port has been put on high alert to address the coronavirus issue that has raised safety concerns globally.

In a statement, he said that this is in line with the measures taken by the ministry of shipping that has directed all the ports to undertake screening and isolation activities while disembarking seafarers and cruise passengers, to prevent the outbreak of the deadly virus through the ships that are calling the seaports of India.

Ramachandran said that VOC Port is closely coordinating with the ministry of shipping and the ministry of health and family welfare in monitoring crew and passengers. 

The port health officer (PHO) has made arrangements for obtaining self-declaration from arriving crew and passengers.

An isolation ward has been arranged at the government medical college and hospital at Tuticorin with necessary facilities and infrastructure. 

VOC Port has issued the standard operating procedure (SoP) for surveillance of vessel, crew and passenger management. The SoP has been forwarded to all the stakeholders for compliance. 

The SoP has also been circulated to the port users through social media.

In order to sensitize port users and stakeholders operating in the port regarding precautionary measures to reduce the risk of exposure to coronavirus, the port has placed signages at the administrative offices, green gate, yellow gate, red gate, Zone-B, port hospital and at the entrance of the navigation channel.

Stating that periodical review meetings with PHO, stakeholders of the port and port users are also being conducted by the management to assess the situation, port officials said that these measures will continue till further instructions from the ministry of shipping and ministry of health and family welfare.


