Volunteers guard endangered sea turtles in time of Covid-19
2020-03-30
KOZHIKODE: Even amidst lockdown in Kasaragod, which has emerged as a Covid-19 hotspot, volunteers of Neythal have another life-saving work at hand. The non-government organisation engaged in turtle conservation for the past two decades has been safeguarding an endangered Olive Ridley turtle nest with 133 eggs, which is expected to hatch on April 1, apart from tending to two injured sea turtles, including a critically endangered Hawksbill turtle.

Neythal president K Praveen Kumar, along with other volunteers, have been taking turns to safeguard the nests ever since the eggs were collected from the Thaikkadappurama beach near Neeleshwaram on February 21. And yes, they have been following social distancing norms in the process.

“We have been observing the lockdown guidelines issued by authorities. At the same time, we cannot abandon the turtle eggs, kept in the hatchery. I have been monitoring the nest daily to ensure they are safe. We have been making the visits to the hatchery in the early mornings so that there are no people around. Today, I fixed a small cardboard around the spot, where the eggs are buried so that the hatchlings won’t scatter away,” Praveen said, adding that volunteers have been taking extra precautions as a person in the adjacent locality was tested positive Covid-19.

Though Neythal had tried in situ protection of turtle nests, this nesting season at places where the eggs were laid, it has not been a success, as all the eggs in one nest did not hatch after sand got accumulated over it. Also, only a limited number of hatchlings survived in the other nest, which had around 80 eggs, following which they decided to shift the eggs from the third nest to the Neythal hatchery.

Praveen and team are tending to two injured turtles as well, including a critically endangered Hawksbill turtle kept in tanks in the turtle conservation centre.

“Getting fish to feed the turtles was a problem due to the lockdown. But police have given permission for one person to go to market to buy fish and we have stocked fish to feed the turtles. While the injured Olive Ridley turtle has lost one flipper and cannot be returned back to the sea, the Hawksbill turtle has been recovering from the injury sustained after getting trapped in an abandoned fishing net,” he added.

Though the current turtle nesting season has been in its fag end, Neythal volunteers have been monitoring the beach for newly-laid turtle nests as female turtles return to the same beach from where they first hatched for nesting.

Ever since its inception almost two decades back, Neythal has released around 25,000 turtle hatchlings back to the sea in Kasaragod.


