Volunteers in Amaravati brave virus scare, hand over pensions
2020-04-02
AMARAVATI: Braving the Covid-19 scare, village and ward volunteers across the state disbursed welfare pensions on Wednesday.


The volunteers started the distribution early morning and covered nearly 94 per cent of the houses by evening. The cash distribution by the government during the lockdown came as a relief to the elderly, the differently-abled, single women, transgenders and dialysis patients.

The government’s decision to allow portability in disbursement of pensions has come a big respite to the elderly and patients who were stuck in areas other than their native places due to the lockdown. The beneficiarues were allowed to receive their pensions at their present residence.

As part of containment measures to prevent the spread of Covid-19, Society for Elimination of Rural Poverty (SERP), the nodal agency for disbursement of welfare pensions, directed village and ward volunteers to start disbursement only after dawn.

Keeping in view the launch of disbursement of pensions early in the morning last month, SERP mission director Rajababu asked volunteers to start their operations later in the day to avoid catching cold in the early hours.

Since most of the pensioners were the elderly, the SERP administration took utmost care not to allow the volunteers become silent carriers of the flu.

In Kadapa, the home district of chief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy, 94 per cent of pensions were disbursed by afternoon. The volunteers handed over pensions to nearly 3.05 lakh beneficiaries against the total beneficiaries of 3.26 lakh.

In Chittoor district, the home town of opposition leader Chandrababu Naidu, nearly 93 per cent beneficiaries received pension by afternoon. Nearly 4.6 lakh beneficiaries received pensions against the total of 4.9 lakh.

The volunteers reached 100 per cent target for dialysis patients attached to government hospitals as they reached out to nearly 4,074 people. Around 4,733 dialysis patients attached to private hospitals also received pensions on Wednesday.

Panchayat raj minister Peddireddy Ramachandra Reddy said they were proud of services rendered by the volunteers. He said nearly 52 lakh pension beneficiaries have received their pension at their doorsteps before afternoon. He said they would reach out to the remaining six lakh beneficiaries as soon as possible.


