Wadarwadi, Janwadi fresh Covid-19 hotspots in Pune
2020-05-29
PUNE: Wadarwadi and Janwadi, two densely populated slum pockets under Shivajinagar ward office, are the new hotspots of Covid-19 in Pune. 


The slum pockets had remained relatively free of the contagion till last week. 



Over the last five days, Wadarwadi has recorded 35 positive cases and one death following which the area of 18,000 people was sealed. 

Similarly, Janwadi with a population of 25,000 people recorded 32 positive cases and a death over the last week following which micro-containment zones have been created in the worst-hit areas inside the slum.

Two other pockets in Shivajinagar, Ramoshiwadi, a slum and a little spaced-out locality of Gokhalenagar, have also started intermittently reporting positive cases. 

Shivajinagar MLA Siddharth Shirole said, “Civic officials sealed Wadarwadi slum on Wednesday. Over 200 close contacts of 35 positive residents of the slum have been put into institutional quarantine facility. Micro-containment zones have been created in Janwadi to rein in the cases. There was not a single case in Wadarwadi or Janwadi till last week.”

Two Covid-19 associated casualties, one each in Wadarwadi and Janwadi, occurred on Wednesday. 

“Both had co-morbid conditions. We have prepared a list of slum dwellers with pre-existing conditions and have told health officials to screen them on priority as they are the high-risk group,” Shirole said.

Doorstep delivery of ration and other essentials is also on the cards in both Wadarwadi and Janwadi. “We are planning to start doorstep delivery of ration in a day or two,” Shirole said.

Pandavnagar area in Wadarwadi is the worst-affected. “People use community toilets in slums. These toilets are potential sites for virus transmission. Hence these toilets need to be disinfected at regular intervals. PMC should provide the mobile toilet facility to these slums as per the recommendations by the central government delegations that recently visited Mumbai’s Worli and Dharavi areas,” health activist and medical practitioner Sanjay Dabhade said.

Sanjeev Wavare, assistant medical officer of health, Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) said, “We have already intensified the surveillance in the affected slum pockets after the first case was reported in Wadarwadi a week ago.”

Like in Mumbai, densely-populated areas, especially slums, are the epicentres of Covid-19 in Pune as well. 

The Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) has declared 65 slum pockets in the city as micro containment zones. No one in these areas is allowed to go out or have visitors.

Experts have warned that coronavirus could spread quickly in slums where social distancing and home-quarantine are not feasible.


