Walled City opens, but citizens throw caution to winds, violate Covid norms
2020-06-02
JAIPUR: The city markets in Walled City came back to life in fits and starts on Monday after the curfew was relaxed following the over two-month-long Covid-19 lockdown. While there were hardly any customers in most garment, footwear and ornament shops, huge crowds thronged some grocery and kirana shops in complete violation of social distancing and safety norms.


Since public transport is not permitted in the Walled City, a huge number of private vehicles was seen in the morning. However, as the day progressed, the number of vehicles and crowds on the roads thinned out as people began going back to their homes, urged by police personnel for moving around without reason.

 

About nine shops were sealed under the Manak Chowk police station area for violating social distancing norms and prescribed safety conditions. But no shops were sealed under Kotwali, Subhash Chowk and Ramganj police stations in the Walled City. One e-rickshaw was fined under the Subhash Chowk police station for operating despite prohibition, said SHO Bhoori Singh.

“Nine shops were sealed under the Manak Chowk police station for 24 hours for not maintaining social distancing. They have to give it in writing that they will not violate safety norms. Twenty-five challans were issued for not wearing masks. Four vehicles were seized,” said Manak Chowk SHO Jitender Singh Rathore.

The Walled City, currently, has 23 containment zones under curfew, where non-essentials are restricted. Five markets have not been permitted to open which include Purohit ji ka katla, Ghee waalon ka raastan, Lalji saand ka raasta, Dadda market and Dhula House. While vegetable carts, fruit and milk vendors were allowed to sell their products, roadside food stalls, including tea and juice shops, were barred from opening in the entire area.

“We are circulating an audio message through various WhatsApp groups to spread awareness among people in the Walled City about social distancing and safety precautions to combat Covid-19 infection. In the Walled City, barber shops, salons, beauty parlours and roadside food stalls have not been allowed to open. We have also not allowed storage of materials and other items in corridors,” he said.

