Wang Qi fears ‘coronavirus’ may land him in jail, again
2020-02-15
BHOPAL: The coronavirus epidemic is giving sleepless nights to Chinese Army veteran Wang Qi, who had come to visit his family in Balaghat, Madhya Pradesh. His multi-entry visa expires on February 29 but with flights to China uncertain, he fears he may be arrested for visa violation. 

Wang Qi, who returned to his homeland after spending 54 years in India, frequently comes to Balaghat where his family lives. His son Vishnu Wang said he has been very anxious ever since the coronavirus epidemic broke out. “Father fears being arrested by local police for visa violation if he has to continue to stay in India because of coronavirus. I am writing to the embassy for help,” said Vishnu. 

The former PLA soldier has faced several problems even after he reached China, says his family. He was asked by Beijing to produce proof of the alleged ‘torture’ he faced during his ‘exile’ in this country. Wang Qi was even put on ‘truth test’ after four of his platoon mates, who were suspended, reportedly objected to financial benefits the Chinese government is likely to provide. “My father’s troubles are far from over. Now, this coronavirus is the latest,” said Vishnu.

Wang Qi was also expecting retirement benefits from Chinese Army, but they are on hold as he was declared ‘dead’ in official records, said sources. To clear his record, PLA has ordered an inquiry into his “disappearance from duty” in January 1963, two months after the India-China War ended, and the circumstances under which he was considered dead, said sources.

Wang Qi was arrested by Indian Army on January 3, 1963. He said he was a mechanical survey engineer and inadvertently crossed the border. Since the war was over, he was treated as a spy and not accorded POW status. After being moved from one jail to another for eight years, he was freed and settled in Tirodi village, Balaghat, under an Indian name Raj Bahahdur. He married and had children but always yearned to return home. After struggling for years, Wang and his family finally visited China on February 10 last year and were given a grand welcome in Xiaozhainan, where his elder brother lives. His return to China hit front-pages in Chinese media even as the government tried to cash in on the situation by showcasing how they got one of their lost citizens after much effort.


