Ward with tony SoBo areas second only to Worli in number of Covid-19 cases
2020-04-05
MUMBAI: The city’s D ward, which boasts of some of the most affluent addresses such as Malabar Hill, Napean Sea Road and Walkeshwar, had reported 30 Covid-positive cases until Friday. It has emerged as the second highest ward in terms of number of cases among the 24 civic administration wards in the city. Four more new cases were reported in the ward until Saturday evening.


Most patients from the area are those who had travelled abroad in the last couple of months or are close family contacts of the travellers. In two instances, the security guard of a building and a driver contacted the virus from their employers, said BMC officials. The security guard had been living in a temporary structure within the premises of a building which had three members of a family who tested positive. The driver was living in along with three fellow employees, and all four tested positive.

BMC officials stated that those from these areas are following the civic body’s home quarantine directives and are not posing any difficulties for the administration.

Till Saturday morning, the G South ward that covers Worli, Lower Parel and Prabhadevi had reported 44 cases, the highest among all the wards in the city. While D ward came second, the thirdhighest number of cases were reported from K East ward, areas comprising Andheri East and Vile Parle East. The international and domestic airport come under the K East ward.

Though these three wards are at the top, the maximum number of people put in home quarantine – 786 – are in P North ward which covers Malad East and West, where 15 positive cases have been found. It is followed by R-Central comprising Borivli East and West which has 677 homequarantined persons and 3 positive cases. The third highest number of those homequarantined are 652 in KWest ward, an area covering Andheri West and Juhu, where 18 positive cases have been found. The BMC has placed around 5,168 people in home quarantine across the city.

