Wary Telangana set for quarantine: Target 10,000 beds
2020-03-19
HYDERABAD: Taking no chances, the state government has decided to have 10,000 beds ready to keep those coming from abroad under observation. Highly-placed sources told TOI that quarantine facilities would be ready in next three days.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates


Allaying fears, senior officials said there was no need to panic and the situation was well under control. The revenue department was entrusted with the task to identify as many beds as possible in public institutitons and educational institutes. 

Revenue officials of erstwhile Rangareddy and Hyderabad districts have been scouting for suitable locations along with health employees. “We are taking these measures in view of the central government’s advisory that those returning from abroad have to be quarantined for 14 days,” a senior official explained.

He clarified that those who test positive or those who are suspected to be having coronavirus symptoms would not be sent to these facilities. “Only those who are coming back from aboard will be sent to these faclities and keep them under observation,” the official said. Health minister Eatala Rajender had already announced in the state assembly a few days ago that virus-hit patients would be kept in Gandhi and chest hospitals.

While underconstruction buildings of the government are being considered for such facilities, some private hospitals have also come forward to provide beds to keep those returning from foreign travel under observation. District officials are engaging some private agencies to provide food at these centres. 

Officials have also decided to counsel people who are objecting to quarantine facilities in their localities. “Most people do not differenciate between an isolation ward for patients and suspected cases and a simple quarantine facility,” an official pointed out. 

Residents in Vikarabad and Rajendra Nagar had earlier kicked up a furore over quarantine facilities coming up in their localities. “Official held a meeting with us. We are convinced with their response. We will cooperate with the government,” KR Reddy, a resident of Vikarabad, said.

