Waste To Wonder Park open, but coronavirus scare leads to dip in footfall
2020-03-16
NEW DELHI: With appeals being made to the general public to avoid crowded places and the newfound emphasis on “social distancing” to slow down the spread of the novel coronavirus, the footfall in popular public areas like the Waste to Wonder Park was found to be severely reduced on the weekend. Similar scenes of reduced crowd were witnessed at India Gate, which is usually brimming with visitors from across the country on Sunday.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates

A senior municipal official from South Delhi Municipal Corporation, which runs the Waste to Wonder Park at Sarai Kale Khan, said the tourist place has seen a reduction in footfall due to the ongoing school examinations, while the numbers have further dipped due to the scare created by Covid-19. “We are witnessing a drop of 30% in average footfall,” the official said. 

He added that several precautions are being taken to disinfect the common surfaces. “We regularly sanitise the common touchpoints, ticket counters, gates and railings using a sodium hypochlorite solution to avoid any kind of contamination,” he added.

The weekend is usually the busiest time for the small park that hosts replicas of the Seven Wonders of the World created from recycled scrap metal, and in the past, the numbers have crossed 15,000 a day against the capacity of 10,000 people.

While the municipal body has decided to introduce curbs on pubs, swimming pools and large gatherings, questions are now being raised about whether the park should continue to remain open during the state-declared epidemic. 

The spokesperson of SDMC said that all precautions are being taken and no decision has been taken yet to close Waste to Wonder Park, but a review meeting has been called on Monday to assess the restrictions and the matter will be taken up.

The park features a 60-ft Eiffel Tower, a 20-ft Taj Mahal and replicas of five other Wonders of the World, built using 150 tonnes of industrial and other waste in south Delhi, and was thrown open to the public on February 22 last year. In July 2019, SDMC had to hike the price to limit the incoming volume of visitors, but the weekend rush still remained over 10,000 people.


