Waste generation dips by 120 MT in Trichy since lockdown
2020-04-08
Trichy: Though the Covid-19 preventive measures have put Trichy Corporation’s sanitary workers and officials on toes, the civic body is relieved when it comes to garbage management as the solid waste generated since the beginning of the lockdown has dropped by about 120 MT.

Trichy city normally generates 435 MT waste a day. Around 60% of it is biodegradable waste such as food waste and vegetable waste from markets, while the remaining is non-biodegradable waste such as plastic and packaging products. The closure of commercial establishments including bulk waste generators such as food courts, wedding halls, hostels and hotels has significantly reduced waste generation. With textile outlets, street vendors and night tiffin centres not functioning, the city’s non-biodegradable waste generation also came down. Each of the four zones in the corporation has reported a 15-30% fall in waste generation. City’s waste generation due to the lockdown has slipped from 435 MT to 315 MT per day.

“Sanitary workers involved in collecting waste from commercial establishments are now mobilised for Covid-19 preventive measures. Micro compost centres (MCC) that collect and recycle waste are less burdened now,” a sanitary official with the corporation said the closure of the Gandhi market alone has resulted in the reduction of 30 MT of waste. The reduction in waste besides saving the time of sanitary workers has also saved the civic body transportation cost.

However, waste generated by residential establishments has not faltered. Non-biodegradable waste generated by residents has marginally increased with people consuming a lot of packed food indoors. But, biodegradable waste has come down marginally. The lockdown has also positively impacted public littering. “Public littering has not been completely stopped but it has come down,” another sanitary official added.

Waste stats

Before lockdown: 435 MT/day

After lockdown: 315 MT/day

Biodegradable: 60%

Non-Biodegradable: 40%

Ariyamangalam zone

Normal days: 110 MT/day

During lockdown: 77 MT/day

Difference: 30%

K Abishekapuram

Normal days: 120 MT

Lockdown: 84 MT\

Difference: 30%

Ponmalai

Normal days: 121 MT/day

Lockdown: 83 MT/day

Difference: 30%

Srirangam

Normal days: 85 MT/day

Lockdown: 71 MT/day

Difference: 15%


