Water consumption goes up in Udupi despite lockdown
2020-04-07
Udupi: The Udupi City Municipal Council had hoped that the lockdown would reduce the number of tourists coming into the district, which would help in preserving water for the entire summer, however it has not been the case. Even though people have stopped coming to the district, the water consumed per day is 7 MLD more than on regular days.

Mohan Raj, assistant executive engineer, CMC, said, “Water rationing will be started in the district from March 1, by dividing the wards into three zones. All the zones will be given water for 6 hours a day. Earlier, gram panchayats (GPs) from Baje to Manipal were supplied water 24X7, which was also reduced to 6 hours a day, from 7 am to 1 pm. This saved 1.5 MLD water per day. When the lockdown was declared, major hotels and lodges in the district, which number 60-85, were closed. Hence, we hoped that the use of water would reduce further, and would be able to save enough water for the summer. However, it has not been the case, as the water consumption continues to remain at 22 MLD per day. In this situation, only 15 MLD supply of water should be consumed per day for the city”.

At this time every year, we consume an average of 24 MLD water per day, including 20MLD for CMC wards, 2 MLD for GP’s and 2 MLD for other uses. 

“Even though we have less people due to the lockdown, the same amount of water is being consumed even now. The reason could be that people are taking additional measures to keep themselves clean, like bathing more than once a day, due to the Covid-19 pandemic. As people are confined to their houses, they may also be doing more gardening, washing vehicles and cleaning the house more than usual, without realizing the scarcity of water,”. he said.

“Currently, Baje dam has water stored at a level of 4.9m. Last year it was at 4.1m at this time of the year. This water will be enough for the next 42 to 44 days maximum. By the end of May, the water situation will be bad in Udupi, if we fail to get rain before the monsoon,” he added.

“The water level at Shirror dam has reduced, due to which water will be pumped into the dam, within a week. Water will be lifted from large holes in the riverbed at Shiroor through pumping, and brought to Baje dam,” he said. 

“ It’s high time people understand the value of water, and help us to preserve it till the monsoon,” he added. 


