Kerala: Wayanad in a spot as active Covid-19 cases climb to eight
2020-05-12
KOZHIKODE: The sudden spurt in Covid-19 patients, linked to Koyambedu market in Tamil Nadu, has emerged as a concern for Wayanad. The district–which was a green zone just nine days ago –now has eight active cases, the highest among the districts. All cases here are linked to the truck driver and cleaner who returned from Koyambedu market.


The latest to test positive is a 11-month-old child who is the grandson of the 52-year-old truck driver who tested positive on May 2 after his return from Koyambedu market. 

Collector Adeela Abdulla said that the mother of the child had tested negative.

Seven of the eight cases reported this month are primary or secondary contacts of the truck driver. The driver had tested positive with his wife, mother, grandson and another secondary contact. While the cleaner tested negative, his son along with a friend tested positive. 

Also, another person who had been working in Koyambedu market tested positive on Sunday.

The spurt of Covid- 19 cases has led to more areas in the district being declared as hotspots, the latest being Nenmeni panchayat on Monday.

District medical officer Dr R Renuka said that after the truck driver from Koyambedu tested positive, the district administration had tested samples of other truck drivers who returned from Koyambedu and had also asked them to stay at home and not socialise.

"Also, we will be retesting the samples of primary contacts of the truck driver who tested negative in the wake of some secondary contacts testing positive," she added.

Transport minister A K Saseendran — who chaired a review meeting at the collectorate on Monday — said that steps to curb the spread of the disease would be intensified in the wake of new cases over the past few days.

The first Koyambedu positive case had ended Wayanad’s Covid-19 free spell for 32 days on May 2 and had turned its status from green zone to orange zone. 

With the new case on Monday, the total number of persons who tested positive for Covid-19 in Wayanad rose to 11. Three positive cases reported earlier were discharged from hospital after recovery.

