Covid-19: Wayanad’s containment strategy akin to Bhilwara’s
2020-04-10
KOZHIKODE: Wayanad district has adopted a particularly aggressive containment strategy similar to ‘Bhilwara model’ of ruthless containment to curb the spread of Covid- 19, keeping in mind the district’s acute vulnerabilities, including lack of adequate health care facilities and having the largest tribal population in the state.

Despite being the least populous district in the state and having had just three Covid-19 positive cases, two of whom were discharged after recovery on Wednesday, the district has one of the severest containment measures in place in the state, especially with regard to securing its borders during lockdown, enforcing quarantine and monitoring remote tribal colonies using hamlet Asha workers.

The district has the highest percentage of population under observation in houses (11,111 persons) and has made home quarantine mandatory for all who enter the district from seven hotspot districts in the state for 28 days. Also, the district has been the first to start seizing passports of expats who violated quarantine and has seized 15 passports so far.

Also, interstate travelers who reached the district after lockdown and tribespeople who came back from their work places in Karnataka are being made to stay in Covid Care centres.

“We had to be aggressive, and even ruthless in some cases, in implementing the containment strategy considering the vulnerabilities of a district, including having a weak health system and having to share porous borders with two neighboring states. Also, we can’t take any chances with regard to the large tribal population. So, we decided to be extra aggressive in securing our borders and in enforcing lockdown,” district collector Dr Adeela Abdulla said.

She said the measures taken has been successful so far in preventing surge in Covid-19 cases, despite having many adjoining district, including Kodagu and Mysuru districts in Karnataka and the bordering Nilgiris district in Tamil Nadu reporting Covid- 19 cases. Also, the three border districts in Kerala, Kannur, Kozhikode and Malappuram, are Covid- 19 hotspots.

But the district has been able to ensure that there have been no new positive cases during the last 10 days.

“We were forced to bring in strict restrictions on inter- district travel also to prevent people from other districts in the state to travel to Wayanad as many people from nearby districts had houses in Wayanad and it was done to curb non- essential travel,” she added.

District police chief R Ilango said the district had begun implementing social distancing measures and securing its borders and constituted inter-departmental crowd dissipation teams, much ahead of other districts, from March 15 onwards.

“There were nine land inter-state border crossing points and one across the Kabani river at Perikkallur; we have secured them by deploying round-the-clock patrolling teams. Also when neighbouring districts reported positive cases before the lockdown, we had the unique situation of people from those districts coming to stay in home stays in the district to stay safe. So we started random checking and strict enforcement of quarantine,” he said.

The textile town of Bhilwara in Rajasthan had hit national headlines for implementing a ‘ruthless containment’ strategy involving isolating the district, effective screening, strict enforcement of curfew and lockdown and having monitoring mechanism for rural areas.

