We aren’t trained for this, say security guards on being asked to deal with Covid-19 threats
2020-03-20
VISAKHAPATNAM: With the country grappling to contain the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic, security guards in corporate offices and big residential complexes are being tasked with the additional duties of measuring body temperatures of visitors using thermal scanners and providing them with hand sanitizers.


These guards, however, have no training in dealing with such devices. S Sadashiva Rao, a security guard posted at a corporate office said, “We have formal training to ensure security within the compound. But we don’t have any training on how to check and ensure that a person entering the building is infected or not.”


Coronavirus in India live updates

“A senior HR official had given us a simple hands-on training on how to use the thermal scanner. We are not aware of the technology,” Rao said. 

Other guards TOI spoke to said that they have been asked to measure the body temperatures of visitors and have been told that the danger line is 98°F. But, they said, that have not been briefed about what to do in case an individual’s body temperature is over 98°F. 

Officials of security agencies confessed that they have not arranged such workshops. They said that the job of a security guard is to protect the building from thefts and possible intruders. They are not trained to deal with calamities such as these, they said.

KSP Prasad, an official at a security agency said, “Security guards undergo training for specific jobs. We often organise mock drills so that they are always on alert. Additionally, there are corporates who want guards to accept couriers and dispatch. But frankly, there is no golden rule on how to train our employees for jobs like this.” 

However, some security agencies have roped in doctors and experts to hold workshops for their employees. In these workshops, the experts are providing basic knowledge about the precautions that can be implemented.

K Sanmukh Rao, an official of such a security agency said, “We are thinking of making such workshops mandatory even after the crisis gets over.”


