We hope anti-Covid-19 drive induces behavioural change, says BMC chief
2020-03-11
MUMBAI: All-out efforts are on to ensure there is no outbreak of Covid-19 within the community, said municipal commissioner Praveen Pardeshi on Tuesday.


“As many as 1.75 lakh international passengers have been screened at the Mumbai airport by the BMC and government doctors,” said Pardeshi. In case a passenger is being detected with fever during thermal scans at airports, immediate steps can be taken even before they leave the airport premises. “What we are afraid of is Covid-19 cases popping out from ordinary citizens of Mumbai. The fear is that in such a case we may not be able to exactly ascertain how many persons the affected patient came in touch with to take the right steps therein,” the civic chief said.


 
The silver lining is the hope that the anti-Covid-19 drive will bring about behavioral changes among Mumbaikars. These include how one should always sneeze into a handkerchief or tissue and wash hands regularly.

Elaborating on the points, Pardeshi said, “We have already started creating awareness on various fronts about Covid-19, starting with the BMC’s website — portal.mcgm.gov.in — where misconceptions are cleared and citizens informed about where they can get help.

“However, our larger aim is to create a behavioral change among Mumbaikars wherein they forever continue to wash their hands frequently with soap and water even if they are not visibly dirty, cover their mouth with a tissue when they sneeze and contact the doctor in case they have cough, fever or difficulty in breathing.”

He said citizens need to be aware that the virus does not spread via ‘bare air’, but “only when an affected person’s bodily fluid gets into another”. Apart from its civic hospitals, the BMC has also roped in real estate body CREDAI-MCHI to identify and designate four to five buildings as quarantine facilities. “We had conveyed the same to the association in a meeting we had with them last week and they have responded positively,” said Pardeshi.

Kasturba Hospital near Saatrasta is the main facility currently to test patients while hospitals like Seven Hills in Marol, Rajawadi in Ghatkopar, the Bhabha Hospitals in Bandra and Kurla, and the Jogeshwari trauma care facility are also being considered for isolation facilities if required. So far, Pardeshi confirmed, 139 persons have been admitted, of whom reports on 133 turned out to be negative, while the reports on six are awaited.

