We need to welcome NRKs but check virus spread: Min
2020-05-16
Thiruvananthapuram: Health minister K K Shailaja has said that the third phase of Covid-19 infection, owing to the influx of returnees from other states and various countries ‘where the number of positive cases is fast escalating’, will pose a tougher challenge to the state.

“It is a matter of serious concern that the number of Covid-19 cases is fast growing in many parts of the world and in other parts of the country, and unlike during the previous phases, more Keralites are returning to the state from such hotspots,” Shailaja said in an article released to the media on Friday.

Kerala, she said, cannot deny entry to people coming from abroad or other Indian states seeking safety in their home state. “We need to welcome them, but cannot allow an uncontrolled entry into cities and villages here, which will lead to a big crisis. There’s no other option before the government but to enforce certain criteria and restrictions as thousands of people are returning by air, sea and land,” the minister said.

Pointing out the huge challenge before the government in ensuring a foolproof screening and quarantine system to prevent Covid-19 spread in the coming days, the minister said the situation called for limiting the daily inflow and better coordination between police, revenue and health departments and volunteers.

“A failure in the system will enhance the pandemic and lead to mass casualties as we have witnessed elsewhere. We should also guard against attempts to blow up minor issues which could bring down the morale of officials and volunteers who are now engaged in a selfless battle against Covid-19,” she added.

Appealing to all to understand the difficult situation the state will have to face if thousands of people cross the border without passes, the minister stressed on effective interventions by the government, committed approach of the officials and responsible behaviour from citizens to handle the third phase of the infection. 

The minister also said that prime focus at this phase will be on ‘reverse quarantine’ of the vulnerable section of people, including aged, pregnant women, small children, people with physical disabilities and those suffering from allied diseases. The government has chalked out a big plan to keep them away from those coming from hotspots. Officials from health, police and social justice departments, anganwadi workers and Asha workers are constantly in touch with the households of these vulnerable people to implement this ‘reverse quarantine’, Shailaja said. 


