We thought we would not survive, says Covid-19 family after recovery
2020-04-19
Bareilly: It was no less than a grand festival on Friday night at their home in Subhash Nagar - a locality which became Bareilly's Covid-19 hotspot - when all six recovered patients of the deadly disease were reunited after almost a 20-day battle.

“When we learnt that all six of us have tested positive for Covid-19, we were completely shattered. After my husband was tested positive, I thought that I may be at risk, but we were shocked on learning that all of us have been infected. We thought that we would not survive the virus, but the doctor and nurses made us comfortable and assured us that we are getting best treatment and medicines,” said 28-year-old woman of their recovery and homecoming. 

After the family of six was discharged from district hospital, Bareilly now has no active positive case of Covid-19. On Saturday, 29 human samples for Covid-19 were tested at a laboratory of Indian Veterinary Research Institute. All of them were found negative. 

Recalling their struggle, the woman said, “It was tough. Though we all were in same ward, we would not touch each other’s belongings, as a precaution. We would even clean the door’s knob with sanitiser after touching it.” 

Praising the medical professionals, she added, “The doctor, nurses and other staff who took care of us were helpful. They would sing carols and would pray for our quick recovery. We are safe and back home because of their untiring efforts. Even after we are back home, the staff still connect with us on video call and continue to pray for our family’s safety.”

The woman’s husband, who works at a Noida-based firm, was Bareilly’s first Covid-19 positive case. On his return to Bareilly, he infected his parents, wife, brother and sister. Only his two-year-old son was tested negative.

The woman’s brother-in-law said, “When my family learnt that they all tested positive, they were completely shattered. I was not scared of coronavirus, but became anxious when I was flooded with calls from health department and police to enquire about how many people came in contact with us.” 

And he has a brief advice, “The rate of recovery of Covid-19 is high. People should not be scared.” 

“We have made a lifelong relationship with the patients. We worked hard to keep them comfortable. We are happy that they have recovered,” Vageesh Vaish, the doctor who treated the patients, said.


