‘We will be fine’: Nobel winner sees hope in coronavirus stats
2020-03-25
‘It will get worse before it gets better.” That is what experts widely seem to be agreed on. But how bad things will get? And how long before they start getting better? Stanford biophysicist and the 2013 chemistry Nobel winner Michael Levitt has stuck his neck out to say that the outbreak will not really be the horror story many are anticipating it will be. Of course, as LA Times says in a report, he does stress on the need to “control the panic”, but believes its trajectory is less fearsome than is popularly believed.



What Levitt noticed about Covid-19 in China
The clue to predicting the Covid-19 trajectory for Levitt lies in the rate of daily increase. Around the last week of February, Levitt reportedly told China Daily News that the virus’ rate of growth had peaked. Further, he predicted that the number of confirmed cases in China would hit about 80,000. And that the disease would claim about 3,250 lives. As of March 24, around 2 pm, there were 81,558 cases in China and 3,281 deaths from Covid-19. As the chart shows, new cases are being identified at a slower rate.


More on Covid-19
  
   Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
   21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
   How to quarantine yourself at home
   Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news
  


Think that is just draconian China?
Levitt says similar turning points can be observed for other countries — even those without authoritarian clampdowns — although most countries hit by Covid-19 are still trying to bring down the number of daily new cases. South Korea is one of the countries Levitt cites to point to a decline in the number of daily new cases.

The report says Levitt analysed data from 78 countries that have had more than 50 new cases every day and that he sees “signs of recovery” in many of them. “Numbers are still noisy, but there are clear signs of slowed growth,” he says However, he reminds that countries that have recovered from an initial outbreak must still prepare for a return of coronavirus. China is now facing new waves of infection coming in from “places where the virus is spreading out of control” and other countries would face the same problem, he says.


So, fact remains we can’t take it all that easy...
For Levitt, the target for health systems has got to be “better early detection” — not just through testing but perhaps also with bodytemperature surveillance — and immediate social isolation. In fact, Levitt said he is for taking strong measures to fight the outbreak and believes that social distancing is a “critical” tool.


...But it doesn’t pay to panic
On the whole, Levitt feels there is unnecessary panic due to an almost exclusive focus on the galloping number of cases. He says that the “virus can grow exponentially only when it is undetected and no one is acting to control it”. While other experts quoted by LA Times advocated a wait-andwatch policy, Levitt says as long as there are strong efforts to fight Covid-19, things should get back to normal. “The real situation is not as nearly as terrible as they make it out to be,” he said.

(Source: LA Times, Johns Hopkins)


