Trichy: We were even ready to face coronavirus to make a living, says dhobiwalas
2020-05-09
TRICHY: As many as 5,000 people involved in washing clothes in the district were left with no income for the last 45 days as the curfew crippled their operation apart from people preferring to do their laundry themselves. 

“As many people refused to give us clothes, we were even ready to face coronavirus for our income,” said K Murugesan, district president of Tamil Nadu Vannar Peravai. 

The washing ghat across Kollidam river near No 1 Toll gate had only a few women from Azhagiripuram near Thiruvanakovil in Trichy washing few clothes on Friday. All the major washing centres in Vannarapettai and Ariyamangalam in the city have witnessed minimum activity since March this year. 

“Not only the washing centres. but also out livelihood have become dry as no one is coming forward to wash their clothes with us. As our business fades away, our people are staring at financial crisis,” said a woman Karpagam from Azhagiripuram. 

Azhagiripuram consists 200 families relying on the profession for their livelihood for many years. Laundry shops in every locality would be their business providers. The clothes given by the people in the laundry shops will be sent to the washermen in the city. 

“We hardly get Rs 5 per cloth. If you deduct the expenses on washing powder and other chemicals, we earn Re1 per cloth. One person can wash 100 clothes each day,” said M Bhuvaneswari, adding that one person gets a maximum of four days of work in a week. 

Eswari, who was in tears, showed her palms affected by skin disease which was due to prolonged use of chemicals to wash clothes. Everyone has this condition.

“As the lone woman with the responsibility to raise my daughter, I have been struggling to make ends meet. The lockdown fuelled our problems further. As our customers want their clothes to be bright, we use these chemicals ending up with skin diseases,” said Eswari. 

Unable to run the show without income, several of them have been at the mercy of money lenders who charge Rs100 as interest per week for Rs1,000. 

Adding insult to the injury, the reopening of Tasmac run wine shops near Azhagiripuram also shattered their peace as their husbands again took to drinking after 40 days. 

Same is the case at Vannarapettai behind Mahatma Gandhi memorial government hospital. As many as 50 families were involved in the profession. The closure of the corporation run washing centre due to lockdown also put their livelihoods at stake. 

As the government relaxed restrictions, the washermen have started getting orders in small numbers from people they know.


