Wear homemade masks to keep coronavirus at bay, says govt
2020-04-05
NEW DELHI: Amid rising scare about Covid-19, the health ministry on Saturday issued an advisory on the use of homemade protective cover for the face and mouth, asking people to wear such homemade masks particularly when they step out of their houses.

“We are aware that social distancing and personal hygiene are keys to prevent Covid-19 infections. Certain countries have claimed benefits of homemade face cover for the general public. Such homemade face cover is a good method for maintaining personal hygiene. Such usage certainly will help in maintaining overall hygienic health conditions,” the advisory said.

The advisory came in the wake of a manual released by the principal scientific adviser to the PM suggesting homemade masks as a strategy to prevent the spread of Covid-19.


Coronavirus outbreak: Complete coverage

In the US, President Donald Trump has asked all citizens to voluntary use non-medical masks as an additional public health measure to fight the deadly coronavirus while keeping medical-grade masks available for health workers.

The US Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has recommended that Americans wear basic cloth or fabric masks that can be either purchased online or simply made at home.

The health ministry’s advisory underlined that use of homemade masks would certainly help in maintaining overall hygiene while cautioning that the face cover was not recommended for either health workers or those working with or in contact with Covid-19 patients or patients themselves as these categories of people were required to wear specified protective gear.


More on Covid-19


 
  Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage
  21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won't
  How to quarantine yourself at home
  Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news
  
 “It is suggested that people who are not suffering from medical conditions or having breathing difficulties may use the handmade reusable face cover, particularly when they step out of their house. This will help in protecting the community at large,” it said.

The advisory also prohibited sharing of such face covers and advised that two sets of such face covers be made so that one could be washed while the other was used. “Hand washing would still remain essential criteria and hand should be washed before wearing the face cover. Such face covers should also not be thrown anywhere but kept safely, washed properly with soap and hot water and dried properly before they are used,” it said.

