Wearables, AI help monitor temperatures during Covid
2020-05-20
Chennai: It is no longer enough to use just a thermometer to measure temperature. As living with Covid becomes the norm, newer, tech-based ways emerging to measure temperature are emerging. Wearable startup GOQii has introduced wristbands that can measure body temperature, heart rate and blood pressure to monitor Covid 19 symptoms with a thermal sensor. With the data collected from devices, GOQii in partnership with German healthtech firm Thryve, is working on early detection of infections. Currently, the wearables tech firm has Mumbai police as its customers. “Governments, hospitals, schools, BPOs, insurance and banking companies, etc are in talks with us to use the GOQii Vital 3.0. Combined usage of the detection algorithm and the GOQii Vital 3.0 Smart Band can help significantly in isolating potential Covid-19 patients and preventing further spread,”said Vishal Gondal, founder & CEO, GOQii.With data recording facilities linked to the cloud, deep tech startups Niramai and Staqu have thermal cameras to detect temperature. The advantage they spell out is mass testing with minimum human intervention.In addition, Niramai’s solution is aimed towards enabling automated screening of population by checking not only for fever but also for respiratory abnormalities using its Thermalytix solution by running an AI algorithm on the thermal images. It monitors the temperature of all people walking into a facility remotely using infrared cameras. On this thermal stream, the company’s algorithm identifies the faces of people to detect suspected fever. “We have also integrated the fever test technology in mitra robots from Invento Robotics. They can be deployed at the entrance of a hospital for screening patients and visitors. Currently, in India, thermal screening is done using infrared forehead thermometers. This method of measuring the temperature is prone to manual errors, has the risk of cross-contamination and does not scale for a large population,” said Geetha Manjunath, co-founder and CEO, Niramai. The solution is currently pilot tested in Fortis, Bengaluru, and recently installed at the Bengaluru DCP office. Besides measuring temperature, the companies are also leveraging the data to detect masks, ensure social distancing and contact tracing. Staqu’s video analytics platform Jarvis has installed thermal sensors in the CCTV cameras in the office premises and is capturing data. “Merely measuring temperature does not suffice. Along with mass temperature measurement, our system also helps corporates comply with the new workplace guidelines issued by the government. It ensures prevention by ensuring wearing masks and social distancing too,” said Atul Rai, founder, Staqu.