Wedding bells to ring at quarantine centre in Madhya Pradesh
2020-05-23
BHOPAL: A quarantine centre in Piparia, Hoshangabad will turn into a wedding venue for a 27-year-old girl, who came back to the city after from Indore on May 15. 

The district administration authorities on learning about the family background of the girl decided to allow the families of the bride and groom to hold the wedding at the quarantine centre at Berseba English Medium School on May 23.

 


Speaking to TOI, the bride Rekha Sahu said, “My sister-in-law and I had gone to Indore for the wedding shopping before the lockdown was enforced. We got stuck there for a month and were only able to come back home in May. I was to get married on April 26, but the wedding had to be postponed. After the second lockdown when I got the permission to come back, I was supposed to be in home quarantine as all my tests were negative. But some neighbours informed the administration and my sister-in-law, her 15-month-old daughter and I were sent here.”

 


She said that as there was no other ‘muhurat’ for another year and a half after May 23, the family sought permission from the district administration for the wedding. The authorities allowed the wedding to take place at the quarantine center itself following all rules of social distancing and allowing only 25 extra people to attend the wedding from both sides. 

 


Her sister-in-law who is also in quarantine with her is helping her out with all the rituals. 

SDM Hoshangabad, Madan Raghuvanshi, told TOI that the district administration allowed the wedding to take place after they came to know about the problems in her house.

 


“They had made all the arrangements for her wedding and it would have all gone to waste as there will be no muhurat for another year. So we permitted the family to hold a small ceremony inside the quarantine centre itself,” Raghuvanshi said.

The ceremony will take place in the school ground and the guests will leave soon afterwards, he added.

Tehsildar Rajesh Borasi who is supervising the safety measures and decorations for the unique wedding said, “We have set up a mandap in the field and a stage for the var-mala. The wedding will take place between 5 pm and 7 pm. Only 25 extra people will be allowed inside the centre for those two hours.”

The bride, however will not be able to go back with her husband to Obedullaganj after the ceremony as a few days of her quarantine need to be completed. 

“The vidai will only take place on May 25 as the girl was quarantined on May 15. We will allow her to leave only after she completes the quarantine period,” said Borasi. 


