Well-crafted messages on Covid-19 by Pune police get more listeners
2020-03-30
PUNE: Audios and videos seem to communicate better what monologues cannot. The Pune police have come up with a novel way to ensure that their instructions to people on securing a complete lockdown till April 14, are followed diligently. 


The police started extensive use of the public address system for sensitising people. They have now switched to audios and videos in simple language to tell people about coronavirus. They have sought help from singers, writers and others to prepare audios and videos in Hindi and English. 

Deputy commissioner of police (zone I) Swapna Gore told TOI, “When people come out on roads, we have to sensitise them. It is difficult to manage the core city areas particularly the heavily congested lanes and bylanes. The PA system was used by the beat marshals and policemen on CR mobiles after the lockdown was announced. We have now prepared audios and videos in Marathi appealing to the public to follow the government’s directives. We are also playing the audios on the PA system installed on autorickshaws. People are listening more attentively to the messages.”

Senior inspector Ashok Kadam from the Warje-Malwadi police said, “We have started playing Marathi audio messages at six places including Ramnagar and Gokulnagar-Pathar slums and outside housing societies to prevent elderly people and others from coming out. The audios also contain details about what is section 144 of the CrPC and the various orders issued and what are the emergency helpline numbers. The audios and videos have also been circulated on various WhatsApp groups launched by the citizens’ group for creating massive awareness,”he added.

Senior inspector Bramhanand Naikawdi from Swargate police said, “Vehicle users are stopped on Solapur and Satara highways, Tilak Road and other places and made to listen to the five-minute audio on social distancing. The audios contain initiatives bypolice on coronavirus. We ask them questions on what they understood and then allow them to go.”

Marketing professional Vinod Mehta said, “The announcements on the PA system on coronavirus are too formal and not appealing because people get stressed when the same message is recited. The playing of recorded messages in an innovative style on the PA system is more appealing and effective in sensitising the public in the slums.”

