Well, locked down, not in spirits (or) (or)High ‘five’, a lockdown well-spent
2020-04-13
Kannur: “All’s well that ends well,” Shaji said.

In the last two weeks of the lockdown, which forced most people to stay indoors, Shaji Narikkodan and his family from Pottanpara near Pinarayi in the district were busy digging out a plan — to build a well in the compound of their house. 

An exercise that started as a mere activity to spend some quality time, turned out to be the most resourceful work they had ever done. With a diametre of 3.2m and depth of 12.5m, the well was dug by a family of five without spending a single penny.

“When the lockdown was announced, it was a collective suggestion that we should dig a well in the compound, as we were planning for some time,” said Shaji, 45, who is an autorickshaw driver with some professional experience in digging wells as well.

But there was no manpower except the family members and no one else had any idea how to dig a well. When he said this, his 39-year-old wife Beena said she was ready to take-up the challenge. Their children — daughter Binsha (20), who is a BSc final year student and son Abhijay (17), a plus one student — also came forward. Shaji’s younger brother Shaneesh, who runs a cellphone shop on Kozhikode, too joined.

It was a collective work that saved almost Rs 1 lakh, considering the present market rate of digging a well.

“Though we were a little skeptical in the beginning, I was amazed to see the way my sister-in-law, who has no prior experience in any kind of manual labour, assisting in the work like a veteran. Her two children too worked hard, promptly maintaining the social distancing,” he said.

The work that begun on March 26 morning was almost complete by April 9. After completing a depth of 16 rings, which is over 12.45 metre, now Shaji has some laterite work left and it could be done only after the lockdown ends.

Though Beena was a bit confused in the beginning, it turned out to be an interesting challenge for her. “It was a new experience. I was doing something like this for the first time and it gave me absolute satisfaction. Now, there is sufficient water in it, which is the result of our hard work,” said Beena. Our eyes were filled with tears of joy as we saw water gushing out from the sides of the well, she said adding that it was the fruit of all the sweat we had shed. The family did not face any water scarcity as they had a well in their ancestral house. But, the water-level had started receding and hence, they decided to have one of their own and now we have one, she proudly said.


