Wenlock Hosp ready to take on Covid-19 by the horns
2020-04-10
Mangaluru: Upbeat over the discharge of four Covid-19 patients on Monday, out of 12 people who have tested positive for the disease in the district, the Dakshina Kannada district administration is not letting its guard down. It has strengthened its preparedness to meet any unforeseen exigency that the pandemic may bring to its doorsteps. The new superspeciality block at Wenlock Hospital has been readied to meet this challenge, with various agencies working in tandem.

Dr Sadashiva, district surgeon and superintendent, Wenlock Hospital, who explained about the measures taken by them to the media, said protocols mandated by WHO and the ministry of health and family welfare, in tackling this pandemic, have been met in developing this exclusive Covid-19 facility, for the district that has been declared a hotspot. Three floors of this superspeciality block have been readied with 227 beds, including an ICU, to deal with a possible outbreak, he said.

Aiding him in this task is John Thomas Ramapuram, medical superintendent, KMC Hospital, Attavar, and his team from internal medicine. Dr Ramapuram said the facility set up in the superspeciality block is state-of-the-art, in terms of treatment and care, in the present circumstances. A team of 230 nursing staff from KMC, government nursing staff and those under NHM are on hand to assist doctors in the fight against Covid-19.

Currently, the Covid-19 patients are being housed in the Ayush block. Dr Sadashiva said patients suspected to be suffering from Covid-19, and those who are confirmed to be Covid-19 patients, are housed on different floors in individual rooms. We have followed the same in the superspeciality block, with the 3rd floor having 79 beds for those suspected to have Covid-19, and second floor with 99 beds for confirmed cases, and first floor with 49 beds for critical patients.

The authorities have also set up 22 other high dependency units (HDU), including 10 in the old block of Wenlock Hospital, 10 in the regional advanced paediatric care centre, and two paediatric ICUs. The whole system of processing patients from the time one comes to the hospital, to their discharge, has been mapped, with each person assigned a specific role to ensure that the district gains the upper hand in its fight against the pandemic, Dr Sadashiva said.


