Coronavirus in Kerala: What state did to prevent panic
2020-03-05
KOCHI: In the beginning of February, Kerala had the first and only three confirmed cases of Covid-19 in India – three medical students who had returned from Wuhan in China, the epicentre of the disease. In less than a month, all three patients were treated successfully and discharged, as mandated, from isolation wards after testing negative twice in succession.


Kerala has since been able to contain the spread of the virus through proactive protocols that seek to educate the general public about precautions to be taken without sounding unduly alarmist. Apart from carrying out a focused awareness campaign, the authorities have been quick to crack down on those spreading rumours about the outbreak.


Coronavirus live: Latest updates

From immigration officials and police to panchayats and local-level health volunteers, a multi-tiered and seamlessly integrated system is in place. The following are some of the preventive measures initiated by the state government at the height of the coronavirus scare.


Airport screening

Passengers arriving from abroad would be given a health card each in which they had to list their travel details and health condition. Before proceeding to immigration, they would need to get the details checked and stamped at a special desk. For passengers from China, Hong Kong or other coronavirus-affected regions, the protocol is to shift them to a transit room where their body temperature is immediately measured.

Each of Kerala's five airports is linked to ambulance and emergency-response services in district hospitals. Any passenger who has fever, cough or sore throat is to be immediately shifted to the linked hospital and from there a message would be passed to the district medical office. This office immediately contacts the family members of the person and informs them about the isolation of the passenger. If the travellers have no symptoms, they are allowed to go home, subject to strict external surveillance by a health team.


Coronavirus outbreak: Complete coverage

Local intervention

Immediately after the first case was detected, panchayat-level bodies across the state were issued a directive on infection-control and home isolation protocols. In a circular issued by the local self-government department, all local bodies were directed to prepare a list of people coming from places affected by the virus and of those in contact with such people. Multiple helplines were set up.


Awareness drive

The campaign focuses on basic hand and respiratory hygiene, including using a tissue or a flexed elbow to cover one's nose and mouth while coughing or sneezing. People have been advised to avoid handshakes and close contact with anyone suspected to have been infected. Standard prevention protocol also includes use of personal protective equipment, depending on risk


Infection protocol

All private medical institutions, labs and consulting centres have been asked to strictly adhere to the recommended infection protocol. Around 215 mental health teams have reached out to 2,600 people in home quarantine to alleviate anxiety and also to counsel family members and people in the neighbourhood.

Use of breathalysers has been temporarily suspended. Police personnel have been directed to use other methods such as medical examination to detect drink driving.


Double check

Blood banks in all districts have implemented a mandatory precautionary measure to prevent transmission of the virus. They have commenced double screening of donors and stopped collecting blood samples from people who have recently arrived from abroad or those with a history of travel to foreign countries. A directive has been issued to all blood-donor forums, groups and NGOs that conduct blood-donation camps to double check the travel history of donors before referring them.


Rumour-Busting

District police chiefs have already initiated strict action against those found circulating fake news relating to the virus outbreak on social media.


Border checks

A team comprising doctors and other health care staff has been screening travellers entering Kerala by road. They use non-contact infrared thermometers to check body temperature and distribute pamphlets about precautions to be taken against Covid-19. 

