What the Covid map tells about Tamil Nadu
2020-04-28
CHENNAI: The western districts might account for one fourth of Covid-19 cases in Tamil Nadu, but it holds several signs of hope in the battle against the deadly virus.


In spite of the high number of cases, the region with eight districts has recorded just one death due to Covid-19 so far.

 


Erode district, where the lone death was reported, however, has zero cases for the past 12 days. It has managed to contain the spread effectively. So is Nilgiris with no new cases for several days. Coimbatore has brought down the rate of increase and for several days had no fresh cases.

Despite the region sharing a border with Kerala, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh, a vulnerable proposition during pandemics, the rate of increase dropped to single digits in the border districts and eventually dropped to zero cases in some. The region also boasts of the only district in the state --Krishnagiri--without a single Covid-19 case so far.

On Monday, the western belt recorded no new cases even as 26 patients from ESI Hospital in Coimbatore. “We have discharged 211 patients totally from ESI hospital while 49 are under treatment,” said dean of ESI Hospital, Dr K Nirmala.

The recovery rate has touched 80 % and at present the number of people recovered is far higher than those under treatment. While Coimbatore hardly has another 20 patients in hospital, Erode has four them of them.

One of the reasons for the high recovery rates and no deaths is that very few patients developed complications and required ventilation. “In Coimbatore only one patient, a 51-year-old diabetic, required ventilation. Of the remaining, only 20% had symptoms but we ensured that they did not develop complications,” said Dr Nirmala. The health authorities identified 28 covid patients who were vulnerable with comorbid conditions and ensured that their blood sugar and pressure levels were under check. All the districts attribute this development to aggressive containment measures. “The measures include isolation of all primary contacts, screening all them, finding secondary positive contacts, further tracing them and isolating them,” said Tirupur collector K Vijaykarthikeyan. 
9


