What lockdown? Autos operate freely in Chennai
2020-05-30
CHENNAI: The prohibitory orders may be in place during the lockdown that is likely to be extended beyond May 31, but autorickshaws and share autorickshaws operate freely in the city and its suburbs. As many as 180 temporary check points have been set up across the city, apart from the regular check-posts, to monitor violators, but few autorickshaws, whose owners charge as they please, have been caught.

On May 22, while relaxing some of the rules imposed while announcing the lockdown, the government had allowed autos and cycle rickshaws to ply in the state, carrying just one passenger. The government release announcing the relaxations further said autos could only ply between 7am and 7pm; that the driver and the passenger should wear face masks; that the vehicles should be sanitised three times a day; and that every passenger should be given a sanitiser to clean hands while stepping into the auto.

The relaxation of rules, however, is not for autos in Chennai, where the number of Covid-19 cases continues to rise. 

But, auto drivers in the state capital have ignored the norms and continue to ply on city roads. In crowded places like Parry’s and Broadway, some even carry two or even three passengers. In many places, there is no police presence and the only enforcers – steel barricades strategically placed to check violators – are no deterrent for desperate auto drivers.

The law enforcers say they have been doing everything to ensure only essential vehicles come out on to the roads. A senior police officer said, “We are working in turns and booking cases against autorickshaws plying on the roads.” Police statistics show 502 cases were registered and 56 two-wheelers, 33 autorickshaws, two cars and 91 other vehicles were seized from 6am on Thursday to 6am on Friday for violating prohibitory orders. Separately, 15 autos were booked for violating traffic regulations in the same period.

But, the reality is vastly different. Office-bearers of autorickshaw drivers’ welfare associations says their members have little choice. The more that 75,000 auto drivers in the city, they say, have been struggling to make ends meet since the lockdown began as their only source of income was stopped. Besides, they add, almost all drivers have taken loans money lenders and and finance companies and are forced to operate despite the rules in force. That is the only way they can keep their families from starving, they add.


