When Coimbatore locked itself up to fight Covid-19
2020-03-23
COIMBATORE: The entire city came to a standstill on Sunday as never before with residents staying indoors as requested by Prime Minister Narendra Modi to fight the coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak. 


Busy stretches such as Mettupalayam Road and Thadagam Road and bustling areas like RS Puram, Gandhipuram and Raja Street remained deserted, barring an occasional two-wheeler or two. 

While all the commercial establishments were shut, pharmacies and petrol bunks were open. However, there were hardly any patrons. Traders’ associations said all members had closed their shops irrespective of political affiliations as this was a public health emergency. 

P Murugan, district president of Tamil Nadu Vyabarigal Sammelanam, said they had urged all the members to observe janata curfew. “Usually, during bandhs that are called for political reasons there would be one or two shops doing business on the sly. But as this was for an important public cause, everyone downed the shutters.” 

Petrol bunks across the city, meanwhile, worked with minimal staff. K Rajasekaran, a representative of Coimbatore District Petroleum Dealers’ Association, said bunks operated with just one or two staff members each. “We encouraged only ambulances and those who brought their vehicles completely dry. In general, there were not many customers.” 

In the morning, some online food delivery personnel were seen riding around the city. But after media reports, the few eateries that were delivering food downed their shutters. A delivery agent, who was spotted in RS Puram, said the eateries had stopped taking orders by noon. “They also cancelled the orders that were already placed.” 

Many churches in the city had called off Sunday mass. Some of them had announced that they would be open from 5.30am to 6.30am and interested people could offer prayers. Jamath organizations in the city had asked their members to hold prayers at home and avoid gatherings. 

A few residents, who were eager to see their city in an unusually deserted state, were seen taking selfies in areas which otherwise would have been crowded in daylight. 

Residents, who had arranged for functions such as marriages and other rituals, either cancelled them or made them low-key affair. A resident from Periyanaickenpalayam in the district had arranged his son’s marriage-related ritual on Sunday. He said they conducted the ritual at home with a very few close relatives. “We had also cancelled the grand arrangements for the marriage and reception.” 

As appealed by Modi, at 5pm, residents came out to their doors and balconies and clapped, clanged utensils and sounded gongs to show their gratitude to doctors, health and sanitary workers and other personnel, who are working to contain Covid-19 pandemic. On their part, the city police band performed in front of Gandhipuram bus stand, while fire and rescue services personnel clapped their hands at their stations. 


