Why this Kerala woman chose to stay back in coronavirus-hit Wuhan
2020-03-11
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The last time Anila P Ajayan, a post-doctoral researcher at Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan went out of her university campus was on January 21, for a farewell dinner for her Pakistani friend Noor-ul-Huda who was planning to go back home after completing her PhD. They saw crowded roads, and people preparing to celebrate their Chinese New Year.

Since that day, their days have been confined to their apartment and university lab inside the campus, always on a high alert with frequent screenings, check-ups and daily monitoring. Anila, who hails from Pandalam, is one among the eight foreign students at the academy who chose to stay in Wuhan, the epicentre of the novel coronavirus outbreak.

She had decided not to take the flight back home even when India evacuated 654 persons from Wuhan on February 1 and 2.


Staying back was the bravest decision I ever took: Anila

In an email interview, Anila P Ajayan said, “I had spent a whole year for the entire process to join as a post-doctoral researcher at the Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. It was a dream come true when I finally received my visa and air tickets in September 2019. I did not have any second thoughts about returning and I thought, even if I came home, I will be quarantined and my parents will be isolated. It worried me but I think it was the bravest decision I ever took.”

Her days under lockdown included moments of fear, anxiety, sense of togetherness and kindness. “My friend Noor's visa was expiring in January last and she was about to fly back home but China government informed her that she can stay till the epidemic is under control without paying any fine… Beyond language, beyond borders she was ready to help me at any time. Between us never did the India-Pakistan political issues come up! We have cared for each other through this tough time and I hope our friendship lasts forever,” she said.

Anila, who has already completed 45 days under lockdown, is also all praise for her professor and university administration. “My professor brought me fruits to eat, knowing that I do not eat pork or beef. He also brought home-cooked food for others. Many young boys started delivering masks and essential things to us without any fear... Every day, the progress of viral outbreak is updated and we are given necessary advice. We also receive a steady supply of provisions and facial masks,” she said.

The initial days of fear have now given way to hope and recovery. “The number of fatalities have come down, we badly miss our families back home. We don’t know when we can step out, but we find a way here to get together. Even this gathering was prohibited initially, now we are glad that we get under the same roof sometimes,” Anila said.

