Coronavirus in Karnataka: When IT staff can work from home, why not us, ask senior MLAs
2020-03-21
BENGALURU: When tech company employees and other professionals can work from home, why can’t we? This is the question legislators are asking in the wake of the Centre announcing that people above 60 are at high risk of contracting Covid-19 and should stay indoors.


Of the 224 MLAs, 107 are aged above 60 and at least 75-80 per cent of the MLCs are in a similar age group. A majority of the senior MLAs told TOI they’re asking the speaker why the legislative session is not being terminated as part of measures to contain Covid-19. The senior politicians include chief minister BS Yediyurappa and leader of opposition Siddaramaiah, both septuagenarians.

However, the concerns raised by the legislators haven’t had an impact on the government, which is insisting on continuing with the ongoing budget session till March 31.

Speaker Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri said: “There are concerns, I know. I’m told this was discussed at the emergency cabinet meeting held a couple days ago, but we decided to stick to the session schedule. It is the government’s call. On our part, we are taking all possible preventive measures.” The steps he mentioned include screening at the entrance and providing hand sanitiser to visitors. 

Earlier this week, the assembly hall was sanitised by spraying disinfectant and the general public was banned from the viewing gallery. But experts believe these steps are inadequate to check the spread of the pandemic. 

“What is to be noted is that Covid-19 spreads more rapidly than any other virus. Restricting the number of people congregating at one place would be imperative. If the meeting of lawmakers is important and unavoidable, then let them meet in small numbers,” said Naresh Shetty, president of MS Ramaiah Memorial Hospital. 

Recently, Congress MLA Anjali Nimbalkar admonished Vidhan Soudha staff members for being lax about the screening process. 

Sources said Yediyurappa was initially in favour of postponing the session, but the BJP central leadership instructed him to continue with it and the CM is adhering to the same.

The regulatory compulsion is the passing of the budget, as the CM has tabled a full budget and it must be approved by March 31. Further, several key pieces of legislations have also been lined up for the duration of the legislature.

However, senior members in the house are suggesting the government table the vote-on-account to seek permission of the house to spend money for the next three or four months and pass the full budget in the continued budget session after the recess.

“People will not take the lawmakers seriously when they themselves are seen to be defying the guidelines laid down by the government,” said former speaker KR Ramesh Kumar, who was health minister in the Siddaramaiah regime. “Moreover, we are risking ourselves and also putting other people at risk,” he added.

Quotes:

The general opinion among us is that it’d not be proper to postpone the assembly session when the Parliament is functioning. However, the concerns being raised are genuine. We will discuss with the chief minister and try to convince him about postponing the session 

— B Sriramulu | health minister 

The virus cannot discriminate an assembly hall from a commercial mall. If we are serious, then we must see to it the enforcement is applicable to all

Uday Garudachar | BJP MLA who also owns a chain of malls


