When clock struck 5, Ludhiana stood united against killer virus
2020-03-23
LUDHIANA: Loud banging of plates, music on speakers and thunderous claps is what the city descended into as the clock struck 5 pm during ‘Janta Curfew’ on Sunday. The sound therapy, advocated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, was followed seriously by the masses.


People of all age groups were seen on terraces, balconies and roads outside their houses, banging plates and ringing bells. Every family member in each household stood up as a mark of gratitude to those fighting relentlessly helping people with Covid-19.

Residents of the city, specially Kitchlu Nagar D block, marked it with fervour. Aman Kochar, a resident, said, “We cheered for healthcare professionals for their relentless work in this critical situation. We felt proud to chant and be a part of this positive energy that our PM Modi has urged us to radiate. We stand as one, we fight as one. Stay home and stay healthy.” 

Her 14-year-old son, Dhruv Kochar, said the clapping was a good way to make citizens feel comfortable as panic was not the answer. “We are thankful to live in such a great country. Our doctors and nurses should be thanked for their services, despite knowing it is dangerous for them too. Let’s all get united and obey the rules made by our government to make our nation free from Covid-19,” he said. 

A resident of Tagore Nagar, Swati Gupta, said smiles on people’s faces amid such gloomy times reminded them of the power of unity and oneness. “The move can easily be called a positivity endorsement drive,” she said. 

“Ludhiana is geared up for the long battle against the virus. Hopefully, the menace is eradicated with self-isolation. A deep gratitude was expressed to all those helping Covid-19 victims get better and those unsung heroes fighting tooth and nail to prevent further spread of the virus,” she added. 

A resident of Kitchlu Nagar D block, Megha Bector, said , “We appreciate the PM’s idea to express gratitude to all those who do not have this luxury of staying at home and working tirelessly to keep us safe.Thank you to all essential service providers for their selfless work, so that our nation is freed of Covid-19.’ Aggar Nagar resident Sudhir Gupta said it felt good to see all his neighbors on the terrace at the same time. “That feeling of unity and togetherness gave me goose bumps,” he said.


