When the balcony is your best  friend in times of a pandemic
2020-03-21
Spreading vibes of positivity amid epidemic and fear, people are turning their balconies and windows at home into mini performance arenas, gaming and exercise nooks. Not surprisingly, the videos of these gigs are being generously shared on the internet over the past few days. Quarantined but in high spirits, people around the world are making the making the most of their stay-at-home time by inspiring people to hope for a safer, disease-free world.


People across countries have been Applauding doctors and those in the service industries for their efforts; India will do so on March 22
As part of his address to the nation, Prime Minister Narendra Modi requested all Indians to take 5 minutes out of their proposed self-imposed curfew, at 5 pm this Sunday, on March 22, to clap for the many people in the service industry who are bending over backwards to try and curb the spread of this pandemic. This is quite in line with the way a few other countries have shown their gratitude for the exact cause recently.
In several countries, citizens applauded the efforts made by doctors to contain the virus and treat the sick. Safa Zouaoui shared a special video from Geneva, Switzerland, and wrote: “#Geneva — #switzerland ????9pm, 15/03/20 — the whole town is clapping for its INCREDIBLE medical staff. You are our heroes! #thankyou.”
People in China have reportedly chanted the phrase jiayóu, which roughly translates to ‘add oil’ — meaning keeping up the fight or staying strong. 


Bustling with opera singers and trumpeters
Despite being one of the worst-hit countries by the coronavirus disease, the self-isolated folk in Italy are entertaining their neighbours by crooning popular numbers from their balcony. In one such video, which is making the rounds on social media platforms, a man projected a popular Fred Astaire song onto his neighbour’s wall, and it got an elderly couple up on their feet, waltzing to it. An aww-inducing moment, indeed.
And there’s more! In one housing complex in Rome, people flashed laser lights and put up a community disco session. Meanwhile, opera singer Laura Baldassari took part in a session in Milan. Sharing her experience, the artiste wrote on her Instagram: “Last Friday I decided to join ‘The singing’ flash mob from my window in Milan. I did it for all who are fighting coronavirus around the world and also for all who lost someone due this terrible virus — to drive away fear, even if we are crying, like in the words of ‘Lascia ch’io pianga’ (from Rinaldo by G.F. Handel), we won’t give up! It’s fundamental to go ahead, to look beyond, to be close to our family and our friends. (sic).” In other countries, musicians are making the most of their EDM consoles, electric guitars, saxophones, trumpets and harps by putting up lively balcony music fests. 
YouTuber Brian May Tribute recently shared a video of him playing We Will Rock You from his balcony, as his neighbours cheered for him. He wrote: “During this terrible period, each day at 6 pm all Italians play something on their balcony. In Rome, in my condominium we played We Will Rock You! Big hug all around the world.”


Working out and gaming on the balcony
In Seville, Spain, people in an apartment complex have begun playing bingo from their homes, and are even doing morning workouts together. Meanwhile, in Barcelona, neighbours played ping pong standing at their respective windows. Yet another netizen shared a video of him playing a quirky version of Pac-Man, which involves wearing a sock on one’s hand, sitting at the window and pretending to eat up all the cars that pass by. How creative, isn’t it!


Celebrating birthdays at balconies
In Lebanon, communities are coming together to celebrate birthdays from balconies. Posts shared on social media include that of people cutting cakes at the balcony, while their neighbours sing happy birthday from their homes.


Meanwhile, funnymen Trevor Noah and Danish Sait were asked to stay quiet
While the videos of Italians singing together trended world over, it didn’t quite work well for funnyman and popular TV show anchor, Trevor Noah. When he started singing A Whole New World from the balcony of his New York apartment, someone yelled back at him, saying, “Shut the F*** up!”
Back home, comedian-actor-anchor, Danish Sait had to face a similar situation in Bengaluru. Standing at his balcony, Danish started singing The Lion Sleeps Tonight, to which someone responded with a ‘shut up’. Sharing his experience on social media, he said, “Beautiful feels! Trevor Noah, apologies for being a copycat.” Danish’s video got many laughing, including actor Dulquer Salmaan, who wrote: “hahaha this is epic! (sic).”





