Rajasthan: When coronavirus ‘misguides’ and punches a hole
2020-04-24
JAIPUR: As a guide and tour operator, Vikram Rana never had an emotional attachment to the character which Dev Anand portrayed in one of his best-ever hits ‘Guide’ way back in 1965. “It’s more of a fantasy than reality,” he pointed out.” 


“There can be a bit of social awkwardness when a new group of strangers show up, and a guide should be able to break that immediately to help people feel comfortable talking to each other. But we never indulge in romance with any guest. We are very professionals,” he said with an impish smile.

In the movie, Raju (played by Dev Anand) earned his living by taking tourists to historic sites. So does Rana for the last 26 years until his life suddenly turned topsy-turvy, courtesy Covid-19. 

During his long career as a professional tour guide and one of the most senior and respected, 

Rana never come across such kind of situation what he has been facing now. 

“The scenario is worse than 9/11.There was a considerable drop in foreign tourists’ footfalls that time. Earning was obviously less but the good thing was all the monuments were open,” he stated with a note of concern. 

He said the Tourist Guides' Federation of India president Sanjay Sharma recently sent a letter to the tourism ministry asking for financial aid for them. “Unfortunately, we got no response yet.

Vijay S Rajawat, another tour guide, said the cascading effect of the coronavirus is crippling the Indian tourism and the fear surrounding it will lead to a massive drop in the number of tourists, both foreign and local.

He said places like Hawa Mahal, City Palace, Jal Mahal, Nahargarh fort, Amber Palace and Jaigarh fort which used to be brimming with tourists from October to April till Easter, are deserted. “And I presume there would be hardly any tourist visible out there even after the lockdown is lifted. The logic is simple. Until the vaccine is out, you can’t expect any foreign tourists not even locals.”

 He also demanded finalcial assistance from the government. Considering the present scenario, another guide Vaseem Ahmed feels how long he would be able to support his family with the savings is a big question. 

“Throughout the year, we depend on the income we earn during a season. Like others we don’t have regular salary not even medical insurance. We have around 4500 both state and regional levels tour guides here and all of us only rely on tourism.” 

He believes the battle against the virus will be won one day. But the world that will emerge may look very different from the one we lived in. 

“The pandemic will force us to reconsider who we are and what we value. Value for humanity or value for prosperity?” 


