WHO clears air on disposal of Covid-19 victims’ bodies
2020-04-01
Hyderabad: Amidst confusion over the disposal of the bodies of Covid-19 victims, the World Health Organisation (WHO) has clarified that the bodies can either be cremated or buried. WHO has described as myth, the argument that bodies of Covid-19 patients should be cremated. The dignity of the dead, their cultural and religious traditions and their families should be respected and protected throughout. Hasty disposal of a Covid-19 dead person should be avoided.

“It is a myth that persons who have died of a communicable disease should be cremated, but this is not true. Cremation is a matter of cultural choice and available resources,” WHO said in its interim guidelines on how to deal with the bodies of Covid-19 victims. The guidelines gain significance in the backdrop of the alleged order of Mumbai municipal commissioner that the bodies of the victims, irrespective of their religion, should be cremated.

WHO further elaborated that authorities should manage each situation on a case-by-case basis, balancing the rights of the family, need to investigate the cause of death and the risks of exposure to infection.

The interim guidelines warn that children and adults above 60 years and immuno-suppressed persons should not directly interact with the body.

“Based on current evidence, the coronavirus is transmitted between people through droplets, fomites and close contact, with possible spread through faeces. It is not airborne. As this is a new virus whose source and disease progression are not yet entirely clear, more precautions may be used until further information becomes available,” WHO said.

According to WHO, except in cases of haemorrhagic fevers (such as Ebola, Marburg) and cholera, bodies are generally not infectious. Only the lungs of patients with pandemic influenza, if handled improperly during an autopsy, can be infectious. Otherwise, cadavers do not transmit diseases.

“Till date, there is no evidence of persons having become infected from exposure to the bodies of persons, who died of Covid-19,” WHO said, adding that the safety and well-being of everyone who tends to bodies should be the priority. Before attending to a body, people should ensure that the necessary hand hygiene and personal protective equipment (PPE) supplies are available.


