Who will quarantine returnees from Delhi? Railway, Tamil Nadu lock horns
2020-05-14
CHENNAI: A crisis awaits the city as hundreds are expected to arrive in an AC special train from New Delhi at a time when the railway ministry and the state government are locked in a standoff over hosting the passengers till their post-arrival Covid-19 test results are out. Union railway minister Piyush Goyal has shot off a letter to Edappadi K Palaniswami, saying the railways cannot quarantine the passengers.

The first train from New Delhi, which departed at 4pm on Wednesday, will reach MGR Central at 8.40pm on Thursday (today). The ministry of railways had announced the train and begun bookings without consulting the state government about the latter’s preparedness to receive and test more than 1,000 passengers twice a week. This made Palaniswami request the railways to keep the passengers on railway premises till RT-PCR tests results are known.

In his letter, Goyal is said to have told the CM that the railway infrastructure was developed for transportation of people and cannot carry out quarantine and other actions as suggested by the chief minister. Southern Railway has around 500 coaches that have been converted into isolation wards, and has hospitals and many buildings where people can be housed.

Goyal has quoted the standard operating procedure issued by the home ministry on May 1 for movement of migrant workers and has told the state government to quarantine the passengers. As per the SOP, the returnees should be home-quarantined and put into institutional quarantine if required, based on assessment. Their health status shall be monitored through Aarogya Setu on voluntary basis.

Goyal is said to have told Palaniswami in the letter that “nowhere does the SOP prescribe compulsory testing with RT-PCR as stated by him.”

“The Union minister said that on arrival, the passengers have to be dealt with by the state government as per the home ministry’s guidelines which have given sufficient flexibility,” said a source.

The state government, which is grappling with huge spike in cases, came to know about the railway ministry’s Sunday announcement about resumption of passenger services through media reports. Citing the number of positive cases in Chennai, Palaniswami on Tuesday had asked the Union minister to quarantine the passengers on arrival on railway premises since there was a chance of spreading virus via AC coaches. He had said that passengers could be allowed to enter Tamil Nadu only after RT-PCR tests.

“There are practical difficulties in testing all 1,000 passengers at the same time,” Palaniswami said, adding that testing could be done in one or two days.

