Coronavirus outbreak: WHO urges industry to raise supply of masks
2020-03-06
NEW DELHI: World Health Organisation (WHO) has warned that severe and mounting disruption to the global supply of personal protective equipment (PPE)—caused by rising demand, panic buying, hoarding and misuse—is putting lives at risk from the new coronavirus and other infectious diseases.


“Healthcare workers rely on personal protective equipment to protect themselves and their patients from being infected and infecting others. But shortages are leaving doctors, nurses and other frontline workers dangerously ill-equipped to care for Covid-19 patients, due to limited access to supplies such as gloves, medical masks, respirators, goggles, face shields, gowns, and aprons,” the WHO has said.

It has urged the industry and the governments to act quickly to boost supply, ease export restrictions and put measures in place to stop speculation and hoarding. “We can’t stop Covid-19 without protecting health workers first,” said WHO director-general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.

TOI had highlighted in a recent report how most medicine stores in Delhi-NCR are running short of masks. In some stores, the personal protective equipment is being sold at five to six times the original cost. 

The resident doctors of Safdarjung hospital, where many Covid-19 patients are being admitted, said they had to protest to get the N95 masks. “Till Tuesday, there were few N95 masks available for doctors. When we complained to the administration, it arranged for some N95 masks and clarified that the suppliers weren’t able to provide enough masks,” Dr Joyutpal Biswas, general secretary of the Resident Doctors’ Association (RDA) of Safdarjung hospital, said.

WHO recommends that healthcare workers, including the doctors and nurses, use surgical masks to cover their mouths and noses, but the US’ Centre for Disease Control and Prevention suggests wearing N95 masks that are thicker than the surgical masks and fit tightly around the nose and the mouth.

