Who’s watching 145 in home quarantine: Admin or cops?
2020-03-19
Nagpur: Divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar on Wednesday said a close watch is being kept on those advised home quarantine, and the administration is monitoring them through WhatsApp groups. Even as another 14 flyers were quarantined at MLA Hostel, Kumar said after conducting test on them, they are being stamped on the hand and released for the 14-day home quarantine. Currently, 159 people are under self-isolation in the city.

“A team of 50 officials has been especially assigned the home quarantine list. A control room has been formed at the district collectorate from where they are making calls to these people. Area-wise WhatsApp groups have been formed to send regular reminders to stay indoor twice a day,” he said.

Kumar said a meeting was also held with the police department at his office and a list was handed over to the cops to ensure people in home quarantine don’t venture out.

Kumar warned that those violating the orders would face strict action. “This is not a frivolous issue and quarantine guidelines shouldn’t be taken lightly. If a violation comes to our notice, we will file an FIR,” he said. 

JT CP Ravindra Kadam said, “We keep a check on them as we keep vigil on criminals and their whereabouts. We visit the houses of such people and see whether they are present at home or not. We also have a list of such persons and distributed it to concerned officials. We are making time to visit their house, but we cannot guarantee that once police visit is done such persons will not leave their houses. It is a restriction that they should impose upon themselves. If you are quarantined for some definite thing you should follow the restriction. However, every time we have visited their houses, they were present and no such persons were seen wandering in the city.”

However, staff at the local police stations said they have not received any such list as yet. TOI spoke to several senior officials from police stations, and all said they have not received any list regarding those who have to be home quarantined. 

“We have not received any such list at our police station. From what we have heard, all such flight passengers are directly sent to Mayo Hospital for check up,” said a cop from East Nagpur.

Cops from West, South, North, Central and South-West parts of the city also reiterated that they were not aware of home quarantine measures nor has any list come from either their own department, the district administration or health officials.

On March 18, TOI had highlighted how there were differences between officials and cops regarding home quarantine monitoring. It was believed cops had received the list on Tuesday itself. There were unconfirmed reports of such people stepping out of homes and meeting outsiders at their places, though norms prohibit all such acts.


