Why Covid-19 tests only at government hospitals, HC asks Telangana government
2020-05-13
HYDERABAD: The Telangana high court on Tuesday further cornered the state government on Covid-19 tests, wondering if it has powers to ask people to undergo tests only at particular hospitals designated by it. The court, however, reserved its orders on a PIL which challenged the decision of the government to confine the diagnostic tests and treatment to state-run hospitals. 


A bench of Justice MS Ramachandra Rao and Justice K Lakshman observed that corporate hospitals have better facilities when compared to government hospitals like Osmania and Gandhi. It also posed several questions to the government while hearing the PIL filed by Ganta Jai Kumar of Nacharam, who wanted the court to direct the government to allow eligible private hospitals to conduct Covid-19 tests. 

Peri Prabhakar, counsel for the petitioner, said people have freedom and choice to choose their hospital and doctor. “Asking them to go to a particular government hospital only amounts to infringement of their rights,” argued Prabhakar. “Those who can afford treatment in private hospitals and diagnostic labs should be allowed to go,” he said, reminding the court that ICMR had allowed 12 private labs in Telangana to conduct the tests.

At this point, advocate general BS Prasad informed the court that the government was conducting Covid-19 tests for free and in a safe environment. “If we allow the private hospitals to do these tests, there is a danger of these hospitals and labs becoming prime sources for spreading Covid-19,” the AG argued. He reminded the court that these hospitals also deal with non-Covid-19 patients.

He said if the government feels the need, it would certainly invite the private hospitals with a rider they must run exclusive Covid-19 hospitals and not admit non-Covid-19 patients. Stating that test kits were limited, he said the government received samples from the private hospitals and conducted 2,000 tests for them. 

