Why Covid death rate is high in Amravati, HC asks AMC
2020-06-10
NAGPUR: Expressing concern over high mortality rate due to novel coronavirus (Covid-19) in Amravati, the Nagpur bench of Bombay high court on Tuesday directed Amravati Municipal Corporation (AMC) to file an affidavit giving details of all 17 deaths categorized as Covid casualties till date.


“We find that the death rate is high. The corporation should furnish details of all 17 deaths, including the names of hospitals (private and government) in which the patients were admitted,” a division bench comprising Justice Ravi Deshpande and Justice Amit Borkar said.

Before adjourning the hearing till June 12, the bench further asked the AMC to file an affidavit stating the steps taken to prevent community spread of the deadly disease.

The HC directives came while hearing a petition by Shivaray Kulkarni, through counsel Pankaj Navlani, pressing for stringent measures to control the exponential growth of deadly virus spread in Amravati.

Earlier, Jemini Kasat appearing for the corporation informed that out of 264 Covid-19 cases, 146 have recovered. Of them, 101 are still active, while 17 succumbed to the disease till date.

He further informed that out of the 17 deaths, four persons were not admitted to any of the hospitals, but they expired at their homes. Some of the patients were admitted to private hospitals, but subsequently shifted to the government hospital, he said.

The petitioner’s counsel contended that blunders on part of various administrative authorities are costing human lives in Amravati. He also prayed for constitution of an expert panel for carrying out testing on war footing.

Contending that a unique pattern of virus spread is being observed in Amravati, Navlani said there is urgent need to conduct aggressive testing on the lines of Bhilwara in Rajasthan which had succeeded in curbing the Covid spread. He also claimed that respondents failed to trace the source of infection in the city.

“Bhilwara administration aggressively tested 25-30 lakh people within a week and in complete contrast to that RT-PCR testing is comparatively very less in Amravati. As a result, the number of positive patients has jumped exponentially,” he said.

In earlier hearing, the HC had directed AMC and collector to file an affidavit explaining why all high-risk contacts were not tested, and to fix accountability for the failure. It also asked the AMC and other authorities to explore implementing Bhilwara pattern in Amravati to contain the spread of coronavirus.



