Why Jahangirpuri is Delhi’s biggest Covid-19 hotspot
2020-04-27
NEW DELHI: With one confirmed death and more than 100 cases of Covid-positive residents, Jahangirpuri has emerged as one of the biggest hotspots in the capital.

Six out of seven containment zones located in the north district are within this region and the affected parts are in B, C, H, K, G and F blocks. According to an estimate, more than two lakh people live in this densely-populated residential colony.

Several cases have also cropped up from Babu Jagjivan Ram Hospital, which has amplified the anxiety of people. A large number of hospital staff live in Jahangirpuri. Many people working at the Azadpur mandi also reside here.

A district health officer blamed such high number of cases from one residential pocket on mishandling of a case of Covid-19 death by a prominent health facility early this month. The official said the test reports after her death in a government hospital confirmed that she was Covid-positive. A large number of people had gathered at her funeral and to offer condolences to the family at her house. At least 31 people, including 26 members of her extended family, were later tested positive.

District Magistrate (North) Deepak Shinde said the area had now been completely sealed and no new positive case had emerged in the last few days. “There is regular patrolling and monitoring by local police and civil defence volunteers. Police are also keeping a close eye through drone survey. We are aggressively sanitising the whole area with the help of the municipal corporation,” Shinde said.

A senior corporation official from public health department said Jahangirpuri exemplified the challenges being faced by the authorities in very high-density settlements where social distancing was hard to achieve. “The area is made of resettlement clusters with small rooms occupied by large number of people. Each house is mostly just 25-yard properties with four to five storey structures. Both bathing as well as toilet facilities are common and used by hundreds of people every day,” the official added.

An official in charge of overseeing the disinfection drive said tankers were being used for sprinkling sodium hypochlorite on wider roads.

First docking station for cluster of Jahagirpuri has been established in B block. It acts as a changing point, a PPE storage centre and a training centre for the civic staff.


