Why TN must come clean on Covid deaths
2020-06-11
CHENNAI: Ahead of ‘unlock -0.1’ and with more testing likely, the state is expected to see an increase in Covid-19 cases, complications and deaths. But, unless it documents complex cases and deaths, the state will not be able to measure the public health impact or plan for timely health interventions to protect communities, say experts.

A day after TOI reported that at least 266 Covid-19 deaths in Chennai till June 8 were not announced by the directorate of public health (DPH), public health activists and doctors’ bodies have pointed out that under-counting deaths can cause serious harm to public health and disease profiling. “It’s not just among the cases not reported. We could be missing more,” said Indian Medical Association secretary Dr A K Ravikumar.

Until now, neither the state nor Greater Chennai Corporation has data on the number of people testing positive for Covid-19, those who died or “probable Covid-deaths” - where there is a clinical suspicion but no lab report. Agencies such as WHO and ICMR have provided codes for Covid-19 deaths - U07.1 for all Covid deaths and U07.2 for probable Covid deaths. In the second case, the virus is not identified through test, but doctors have clinically or epidemiologically diagnosed and suspect it, said ICMR-National Centre for Disease Informatics and Research director Dr Prashant Mathur. “Both have to be recorded,” he said. While the state has recorded 326 deaths under -- U07.1, there has been none under U07.2 so far.

“We must know the total number of deaths in the city in the past three months,” said Dr Ravikumar. “Many deaths in the city including those that happened at home may not have been accounted. We must do a verbal autopsy to reconcile these deaths. It is important information during the time of pandemic.”

Tamil Nadu Government Doctors’ association has demanded update on deaths registered across all TN cities. A spike in figures indicates increase in Covid-19 cases, said its president Dr K Senthil.

On March 30, there were 956 SARI cases reported across the state of which 38 were admitted to various hospitals. By April 15, there were 190 admissions and on June 9, there were more than 500 admissions. “Many patients die within hours of being admitted to hospitals and if the swabs are not taken from the deceased we won’t know the number of patients who died with the infections,” said a senior public health official. 

A team of officials under city health officer Dr Jagadeesan, the registrar of births and deaths for Chennai, has begun preparing reports of patients who died of Covid-19 in the city. The report will be sent to the directorate of public health. The state has constituted an 11-member expert committee under the chairmanship of DPH (OSD) Dr P Vadivelan to “analyse and streamline the Covid-19 death reports with regard to Chennai Corporation.”

Health secretary Beela Rajesh said the registrar of births and deaths in the state, the director of public health, reconciliates deaths once every year. “Now, based on demand we have set up a committee for this. It will analyse case sheets and add more people to the toll,” she said. “Everything about the disease has changed – testing, treatment and management. We are learning every day. The committee will analyse death reports and update toll.”


