Nagpur: Wife, colleague of Covid-19 patient test positive
2020-03-14
NAGPUR: A 43-year-old woman and a 45-year-old man working with an IT firm in the city were found to have contracted the novel coronavirus after their test reports were found positive on Friday. While the woman, a training coordinator at a nursery school, is the wife of the IT professional who was the first from city to test positive for Covid-19 virus, the man is his colleague in the same company. The duo returned from the US via Doha in the same flight on March 6.


Coronavirus outbreak live updates


Divisional commissioner Sanjeev Kumar told TOI that the condition of the new patients is stable and both are in the isolation ward at Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH). “The doctors have started treatment and they would be under observation,” he said.


Coronavirus fear goes viral: Why you shouldn’t panic

At GMCH, two teams of doctors and paramedical staff are treating these two patients. At present, they are not showing any symptoms. So, doctors are constantly monitoring various general health parameters like temperature and BP periodically. The treating doctors have been given special personal protective equipment, heavy-duty gloves, masks, face shield, long gowns and closed shoes. 


More on Covid-19

 
  Coronavirus: What are the symptoms
  52 testing sites for coronavirus in India
  Helpline numbers for states and UTs
  Do fever and cough mean you need Covid-19 test?
  How to stay safe
  How to quarantine yourself at home
 
These two Covid-19 positive patients were among the 14 persons who were in close contact with the IT professional ever since he landed in the city on March 6. The remaining 12, including his son and daughter, were discharged after their test reports were found to be negative. But they were advised to remain in home isolation and take precautions for at least two weeks. 

Medical superintendent of GMCH Dr Avinash Gawande informed that four more suspects reported themselves to the GMCH on Friday. Two of them tested negative. The authorities said, “Other samples need to be tested again tomorrow as results are inconclusive.”

“They are aged about 36, 43, 53, and 34 years. They are working in the same company and travelled with the first Covid-19 positive patient,” he said.

The 45-year-old IT professional developed symptoms after he landed in the city and got himself admitted. He’s currently admitted in Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH), where he’s undergoing treatment.

“We’re now trying to trace out persons who came in contact with two new cases and also the places they visited in last six days. Those who contacted would be also be tested and kept in the isolation ward to avoid any further spread,” Kumar said.

While asking the citizens not to panic, the commissioner ruled out closing down of schools and colleges due to increasing number of cases stating that the state government would take a final call on the issue as the problem arising out of it was not limited to Nagpur alone. 

“Anyone suspecting symptoms should immediately put himself/herself into the self-insolation for 14 days at their homes only, ” Kumar said.

During the media interaction in afternoon, Divisional deputy director of health services Dr Sanjay Jaiswal informed that number of Covid-19 cases had rose to the tree following detection of two more cases. Collector Ravindra Thakare however adopted a cautious approach stating that divisional commissioner was taking a review and only after confirmation from doctors, he would officially declare addition of two more cases.

Both Kumar and Thakre assured that the district administration had fully geared up for tackling the menace if it turned into an endemic. “We’ve set up isolation wards in MLA Hostel and also in GMCH and IGGMCH. Even private hospitals were asked to remain on alert. Over, 300 isolation beds have been kept ready for the patients as of now. We’ve also started round ‘o’clock helplines from Thursday. We’ve received about 28 complaints of which 20 received in the control room of collectorate and ten at the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) helplines,” they said.

