Wife, son of first Covid-19 victim also test positive
2020-03-28
Madurai: The wife and second son of the 54-year-old man from Anna Nagar, who died of Covid-19 on Wednesday, have also tested positive for the virus, confirmed health minister C Vijayabaskar on Friday. Both patients are stable and this takes the total number of Covid-19 positive cases in Madurai to three.

The woman and her two sons were admitted to the Covid-19 isolation ward at Government Rajaji Hospital (GRH) and their samples taken for testing the day after the death of the man. On Friday, the samples of the woman, 49, and second son, 22, alone returned positive and they continue to undergo treatment. Hospital sources said that samples of the 27-year-old elder son have been sent again for re-testing.

Meanwhile, health officials are struggling to pinpoint the source of infection of the 54-year-old victim and his family. This was because the test results of all eight Thailand preachers who were in contact with him were negative. “We are unable to ascertain who all were in contact with him and are only pursuing the leads given by family members. We are widening the net as far as possible but the point of infection is unknown,” said an official adding that they can’t conclude whether it was a case of local transmission.

The Thailand preachers despite testing negative continue to held at a quarantine facility, according to district officials. In Madurai, 3,643 people continue to be under home quarantine while 20 are staying in a quarantine facility.

In Tirunelveli district, a 39-year-old man and a 23-year-old man were admitted to the Covid-19 isolation ward at Tirunelveli Government Medical College Hospital on Friday. Samples have been sent for testing and five others previously admitted are also awaiting results. The 43-year-old Covid-19 positive patient also continues to undergo treatment at the isolation ward. A total of 2,268 people are under home quarantine in the district.

In Kanyakumari, more than 4,480 people are currently under home quarantine, one of the highest in the state. Health officials with aid from revenue officials and police have started cracking down on those violating home quarantine. On Friday alone, FIRs were registered based on complaints by health officials against 25 people for leaving their houses despite being under home quarantine.


