Wife, crew of cargo vessel in Cuttack hospital over coronavirus fear
2020-03-04
BHUBANESWAR/KENDRAPADA: The crew member of a cargo ship and his wife, both Indian nationals, were admitted to the isolation ward of SCB Medical College and Hospital in Cuttack on Tuesday for the suspected novel coronavirus (COVID-19) after they showed symptoms of mild fever.

The ship “Chemstar Stellar,” a chemical tanker sailing under the Panama flag and carrying 24 crew members and their families reached the Paradip coast on March 1. They were quarantined as the the ship had touched Zhapu in China (February 8), Onsan in South Korea (February 12) and Singapore (February 24) during its journey.

“Since the couple showed symptoms of fever, they have been moved to the isolation facility in Cuttack from Paradip on Tuesday while others on board remain in the vessel and will be under observation,” said Ashok Paikray, state surveillance officer.

Hospital authorities said the condition of the couple is stable. “They are being treated for their symptoms. The couple’s blood and throat swab samples have been collected. These will be sent to National Institute of Virology, Pune, by the Regional Medical Research Centre (RMRC) in Bhubaneswar for further tests to rule out COVID-19. They will be here till their test results come in the next three to four days. Future course of action will depend on the test results,” said Bhubanananda Maharana, emergency officer at SCB.

Paradip Port Trust (PPT) authorities said there is no impact on cargo handling at the port because of the development. “The ship was allowed to anchor at the port to unload 20,000 metric tonne of sulphuric acid. On berthing, the health officials boarded the vessel and examined all the crew members as per protocol. As a precautionary measure, no crew member is allowed shore access because of the vessel’s travel history. However, there is no impact on the development of cargo handling work in the port,” said Rinkesh Roy, chairman of PPT.

Daily update of health status of crew has been made mandatory for all the vessels during their stay in Paradip. “People of Paradip are being made aware about the symptoms and preventive measures, through messages displayed on big electronic boards in the township,” Roy added.

The state government on Tuesday decided to increase vigil on possible cases. “The director of medical education and training have been asked to keep close watch on the situation. While there is no reason for people to panic, the government is focusing on greater awareness and stricter vigil,” health minister Naba Kishore Das said.


