Will Next Academic Year Also Bear Covid Brunt?
2020-04-19
Vijayawada: The Covid-19 outbreak and extension of the lockdown have not only cast uncertainty on the current academic year, but also the next academic year, 2020-21. This may force the education department to revise its academic calendar.

Andhra Pradesh is yet to conduct the class X exams, while the students of class VI to IX were promoted to the next class based on their attendance. 

The class X exams have been deferred twice already – once due to the then proposed local body elections and later due to the lockdown. The spot valuation of intermediate (10+2) answer sheets that was scheduled to begin from March 21 has been suspended amid the coronavirus scare.

The state varsities have also put the year/semester-end exams for engineering, graduation and post-graduation courses on hold. Even entrance examinations have been deferred due to the Covid outbreak. Even if the lockdown were to be lifted on May 3, students may need some time to cope with the situation and prepare for the exams.

The year/semester-end examinations were supposed to be concluded by the first week of April, followed by various entrance exams. However, authorities concerned have been unable to chalk out any plan with regard to the rescheduling due to the unprecedented situation. But the students, now limited to their homes, are anxiously waiting for the exam schedules.

As the new admissions are related with the results of year-end and/or entrance tests, this may hamper the planning for the new academic year.

The University Grants Commission (UGC) has recently constituted two separate committees. While one committee will look into the matters pertaining to the exams and academic calendar, the other committee will prepare an online education strategy.

Speaking about the scenario, director of Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy, VSRK Prasad said the educational institutions have to maintain social distancing even after the lockdown is lifted.

 “If the year-end and entrance exams can be concluded by June, the classes can begin by August after completing the counselling and admission process. This way, the educational institutions can limit the loss of new academic year to a few weeks,” said Prasad.

Explaining about the measures taken during the lockdown at the IIPE, the director added that IIPE has preponed the summer vacation and scheduled the exams for June end. “Meanwhile, the faculty have been conducting online classes,” he said.

State education minister A Suresh two days ago made it clear that they will take the final call on exams following the lifting of the lockdown, adding that they have directed the varsities to conduct online classes meanwhile. 

The AP school education department has provided e-content to class X students apart from telecasting two hours of video lessons on Doordarshan to prepare them for the public examinations at homes.


