Will seize your vehicles, Mbd traffic cops warn lockdown violators
2020-04-10
Bareilly: With local administration imposing complete restriction on any vehicular movement, except those with curfew passes, in Moradabad from Thursday, traffic police has stepped up action against lockdown violaters.

To ban unnecessary movement of people and vehicles, the traffic police has been directed to impound vehicles and take legal action against the violaters

With the state government imposing complete lockdown across 15 districts to curb the coronavirus from spreading, the Moradabad administration on Thursday sealed three areas in Moradabad—Galshaheed, Mughalpura and Majhola. The areas were identified on the basis of the recent movement of Tablighi Jamaatis, said officials.

Speaking with TOI, Moradabad superintendent of police (traffic) Satish Chandra said, “The district administration is on high alert and is taking every possible measure to combat the spread of novel coronavirus, Even as the lockdown has been enforced, there are people who continue to venture out for no specific reason. Till now, commuters spotted on the roads were being intercepted by police personnel and let off after a warning. Now, this won’t be tolerated any more. Directions have been issued to ensure 100% implementation of the lockdown, especially in the areas identified as coronavirus hot spots and sealed. Therefore, legal action will be initiated against anyone caught wandering about the streets, and their vehicles will be seized on the spot. Only those with a curfew pass will be allowed to move."

The district administration has issued curfew passes to individuals associated with essential services such a newspaper hawkers, fruit/vegetable vendors and those delivering LPG cylinders, among others.

SP (traffic) Chandra added, “Traffic policemen have been deputed across the city, including prominent areas and junctions, while a huge police force has been deployed in the areas identified as corona hot spots, to ensure proper compliance of rules.” 

======


