Will those arriving be quarantined? Telangana to decide today
2020-05-24
HYDERABAD: A day before domestic air travel resumes across airports in India, passengers travelling to Hyderabad are still clueless about the quarantine protocol they need to follow, once they touchdown at the Rajiv Gandhi International Airport (RGIA). 


A tweet put out by TOI on Saturday morning — to connect with passengers taking a flight on May 25 — saw scores of readers ask only one question: Will we need to be quarantined once we reach Hyderabad?


@TOIHyderabad Any idea about telangana norms related quarantine for domestic Travellers. I'm trying to find out but… https://t.co/445c6S28Wq— Sanjay Bajaj (@sanjaybajaj89) 1590247243000

Asked Sanjay Bajaj: “Any idea about Telangana norms related to quarantine for domestic Travellers. I'm trying to find out but no response from any resource.” Another flyer, Kuriseti Sudhir tagged @RGIAHyd and @TelanganaCMO seeking clarity on the same issue. “Dear Sir, Can you please clear the air on the quarantine norms in the state of Telangana for the passengers travelling from 25th May through domestic flights?” he wrote. 


@RGIAHyd @TelanganaCMO Dear Sir Can you please clear the air on the quarantine norms in the state of Telangana for… https://t.co/FApPMadE49— kurisetisudhir (@kurisetisudhir) 1590248472000

The lack of clarity, many said, is what’s holding them back from booking their tickets. They appealed to the authorities to at least confirm if they have to undergo institutional quarantine — like Karnataka which has announced that passengers from six states will be sent for a mandatory seven-day institutional quarantine — or can be quarantined at home. 


@RGIAHyd Could you please share what is the state protocol for passengers arriving in Telangana via domestic flight… https://t.co/inQrmrS6GR— Neha Maheshwari (@neha_mahesh03) 1590248383000


@TelanganaCMO hello sir I would like to know that how much will be the quarantine period for persons coming from d… https://t.co/XZXYDXRgyS— Anubhav sood (@Anubhavsood2) 1590238374000

“Could you please share what is the state protocol for passengers arriving in Telangana via domestic flights? Whether it is home quarantine or institutional and for how many days? Several news articles are doing the rounds hence requesting a confirmation,” wrote Neha Maheshwari, in response to TOI’s tweet. As did Anubhav Sood: “@TelanganaCMO hello sir, I would like to know that how much will be the quarantine period for persons coming from domestic flights in Telangana from May 25? And will it be a home or institutional quarantine.”

When contacted, senior government officials said that Telangana is yet to take a final call on the issue. “We are still deliberating. We will announce it on Sunday (today),” said an official. 

Earlier, the state health minister Eatala Rajender had said that the state is awaiting ICMR guidelines and will abide by them. Attempts to reach him on Saturday, failed.


