Delhi: Will go to HC with Covid-19 death data ‘mismatch’, say corporations
2020-05-30
NEW DELHI: BJP councillors in the three corporations have decided to approach Delhi high court with data of funerals of all those who died of Covid-19 to argue their case regarding mismatch in the number of deaths released by Delhi government. The high court had rejected a petition filed earlier to scrap the death audit committee.


The three civic bodies are also planning to release daily reports on the number of Covid-19 related funerals from Monday.

SDMC standing committee chairperson Bhupender Gupta said that all facts were not presented before the court by the last petitioner. “We have data from all hospitals. Will doctors lie while sending a body for the funeral?” he asked.

Jai Prakash, standing committee chairperson of north corporation, said that 50 wood pyre platforms at Nigambodh Ghat were reserved for corona patients and an area had been demarcated for other funerals. “We will provide PPE kits to the cremation ground workers so that their fears can be allayed. People have been skeptical of the ash flying around during the traditional wood cremations,” he added.

Meanwhile, the corporations claimed that wood-based cremations had increased the daily cremation capacity of Covid-19 infected bodies to 100.

“Only CNG furnaces were being used to dispose of the bodies. The three CNG furnaces at Nigambodh Ghat could dispose of only 18 bodies, while the four units at the Punjabi Bagh facility processed 24 bodies daily. In addition to these facilities, bodies were also being buried in the grounds at Bahadurshah Zafar Marg, Mangolpuri, Madanpur Khadar and Mangolpuri Christian Burial Ground,” Radha Krishan, spokesperson of SDMC said.

Now, the Punjabi Bagh facility can cremate 22 bodies daily on wood pyres, Nigambodh Ghat 16, Panchkuian Road 10, Karkardooma eight and the electric crematorium at Lodhi Road six.

“The overall capacity has doubled from 45 bodies per day. The capacity can be increased if the situation arises. We are committed to deliver services at this critical time in coordination with all Covid-19 designated hospitals,” SDMC said in an official statement.

