Will Covid-19 cast a shadow on Haridwar Mahakumbh?
2020-04-03
Haridwar: The Covid-19 pandemic has dealt a severe blow to the preparations being made for the Mahakumbh Mela in Haridwar scheduled to begin in January next year. 

Due to the lockdown, the preparations for the mega festival including construction of permanent and temporary structures on mela land have come to a standstill with labourers involved in various projects leaving. 

“Most of the labourers employed in several projects, including underground cabling and gas pipeline, were from Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. They are likely to take months to return to work. The progress of work which had already been slow, will get further delayed,” said Rajesh Shivpuri, a resident.

Mela officer Deepak Rawat, however, struck a positive note, saying, “We may have to work harder and at a faster pace, but won’t let the Corona crisis affect Mela preparations beyond a limit.” 

He added, “We had kept a margin of over a month while fixing October as the deadline for most projects. There will be ways to tackle problems the lockdown might engender. We still have time.” 

He added that they were utilising the time of the lockdown to plan and work out detailed project reports (DPR), so that when the lockdown is lifted, day and night shifts can be started employing higher number of labourers to complete the work on time. 

Meanwhile, Akhil Bharatiya Akhada Parishad president Narendra Giri, who had time and again expressed concern over “slow pace of Mela work”, told TOI over phone from Prayagraj that “we have to first tackle the Covid-19 threat and can wait for Kumbh preparations”. 

Nevertheless, several concerns still persist regarding the Kumbh mela preparations in view of the Covid-19 threat. With the mela barely nine months away, if the threat of the disease continues to persist, will such a mega gathering -- in which crores of people congregate -- be able to take place, given the social distancing norms that have been put in place to combat the threat? 

Former general secretary of Ganga Sabha, Ram Kumar Mishra, expressing similar apprehensions, added that the ongoing lockdown has also resulted in non-availability of construction material, a problem contractors had faced earlier as well, and which may lead to inevitable delays in meeting deadlines.


