Will get tough on lockdown: Top brass in Hyderabad
2020-04-21
HYDERABAD: After DGP M Mahendar Reddy talked tough on strict adherence to the lockdown guidelines, police commissioners of Hyderabad and Cyberabad — Anjani Kumar and VC Sajjanar — upped the ante asserting that enforcement across the city would be very stringent from Tuesday. 


While food deliveries and takeaways would not be allowed, delivery executives’ vehicles found violating the lockdown norms would be seized, the CPs warned. 

Anjani Kumar said 12,000 personnel have been deployed in city for bandobust round-the-clock. “Food delivery apps will not be allowed to function. We will seize vehicles of the delivery executives and book cases if rules are flouted,” he said.

According to the commissioner, 49,463 cases related to lockdown violations have been booked across the city so far. As many as 69,288 vehicles have been seized. 

“E-pass facilities for people tending to essential services will be launched. Special Branch police will verify a person’s detail when he or she provides necessary information on our website. A pass will be issued once the verification is done but we will cancel the pass if we come across any lapse,” he warned.

He elaborated on contact tracing being carried out by police. “So far, there have been 395 positive cases in the city — 331 of them are active cases, while 20 people have died. We are tracing 1,989 primary contacts and placing them under quarantine. There are a total of 124 containment zones in the city,” the CP said.

He said that apart from hand sanitiers, face masks and gloves for cops at 113 check points in the city, PPE kits have also been given to personnel deployed at Gandhi Hospital. 

Meanwhile, Sajjanar said tenants could file complaints if landlords force them to pay rents. 

He also asked people to not order food online. “Food delivery and takeaways are not allowed till May 7. We have seized over 10,000 vehicles during the lockdown period,” Sajjanar said.


