Goa: With lack of visitors, wildlife in Mollem forest area flourishes during lockdown
2020-06-08
PANAJI: The frequency of wild animal sightings at the Bhagwan Mahavir Wildlife Sanctuary and Mollem national park has been increasing ever since the lockdown.

Forest officials have attributed this to the decrease in human intervention in the Dudhsagar area since March due to lockdown restrictions.

The wildlife in the forest area has therefore been able to move around freely throughout the summer months.

“Tourism activities at the Dudhsagar waterfalls were suspended due to the lockdown over the past months due to which wildlife sightings have increased in the area,” range forest officer Paresh Porob told TOI.

When the 240 jeeps to Dudhsagar were plying on the 11km stretch in the national park, the animals preferred to stay away from the human line of sight. Due to the stretch being undisturbed, range forest workers often sighted wild animals walking by on the internal roads of the area besides moving around the periphery.

“We used to sight wild animals regularly, but the frequency of sightings has increased only after the lockdown. Some of these animals have also been coming out in search of water owing to the summer heat,” Porob said.

Additional principal chief conservator of forests Santosh Kumar said that camera traps were installed near water holes since the animals are bound to come to the water point during the summer. These camera traps have captured evidence of leopards, bisons, wild boars and sloth bears during this period.

“Biotic interference is at its minimal in the sanctuaries these days. When there is less interference, it is good for the wildlife to enjoy their freedom. This also helps the general eco-system to improve,” he said.

In addition to these animals, herds of bisons, deers and wild dogs have also been sighted by the range office workers during the lockdown.

While the latest MHA advisory has allowed religious places and restaurants to reopen from June 8, wildlife sanctuaries are yet to get a green signal. The state’s only zoo in Bondla is also awaiting orders from the Central Zoo Authority (CZA) for the same.

“We haven’t received any protocol from the government of India, yet. But, the sanctuaries are often closed to visitors during the monsoon months in Goa. The Bhagwan Mahavir Wildlife Sanctuary and Mollem national park is shut from mid-June to August and reopens only in September since the route to Dudhsagar becomes very difficult during the monsoon,” Kumar said.


