With 13 new Covid-19 cases, total now 133 in Rajasthan; 85-yr-old Alwar man dies
2020-04-03
JAIPUR: Thirteen people tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday, taking the total number of infected to 133 in Rajasthan. Among the 13 new cases, three are linked to Tablighi Jamaat.

Out of the 13 new cases, seven are from Ramganj area of Jaipur, two from Jodhpur and one each from Bharatpur, Dholpur, Jhunjhunu and Udaipur. The Udaipur case is a 16-year-old student who returned from Indore recently.

The state also recorded its third Covid-19 death when an 85-year-old person died while undergoing treatment at Sawai Man Singh Hospital here. He was shifted from Alwar to Jaipur on Wednesday.


‘Rapid testing kits will be made available’

Bharatpur and Dholpur reported their first Covid-19 cases, while Jhunjhunu reported its ninth case. All the three districts reported one each case of Tablighi Jamaat persons infected with the virus. With two new cases, the count in Jodhpur increased to 10. “A 26-year-old woman, who has a travel history of visiting Ahmedabad, has been found infected with the virus,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary, health.

Another case from Jodhpur is a 27-year-old woman who belongs to an area where a large number of people from other states had recently come and are staying there. The health department has intensified screening in the area to find if more such cases exist.

The 16-year-old person from Udaipur district had reached his hometown from Indore. Earlier, a father-son duo who rode a motorbike from Indore to Dungarpur were found infected with the virus.

Covid-19 epidemic has been ravaging Ramganj area of Jaipur’s Walled City where 33 people have been found infected with the virus since March 26. Ramganj has emerged as a hotbed for the pandemic where health teams have to face misbehavior from people and, despite all adversities, the teams are taking measures to get all the people in the area screened.

“We have deployed 149 teams which have surveyed 7,637 houses and screened 42,805 people for influenzalike illness. However, in some areas, residents misbehaved with health teams though no violence was reported,” said Dr Narrottam Sharma, chief medical health officer, who is spearheading the fight against Covid-19 in Ramganj area.

Meanwhile, the state government has decided to conduct sero-surveillance to find out if the virus has entered the community level. “Rapid testing kits, which has been approved by the Indian Council of Medical Research, will be made available. This test detects antibodies and antigens with the use of stripes to check community spread of the virus,” said health minister Raghu Sharma. He said random sampling will be conducted. Doctors have been assigned to develop a model for random sampling and conduct sero-surveillance.

