With 33 more Covid-19 cases, Uttarakhand tally touches 749
2020-05-31
DEHRADUN: With 33 fresh coronavirus cases reported in Uttarakhand on Saturday, the state tally of the virus has now reached 749.

 On the day, tourism minister Satpal Maharaj’s wife Amrita Rawat also tested Covid-19 positive. Dehradun district magistrate Ashish Kumar Srivastava told TOI that the minister’s wife has been moved to All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS) Rishikesh. "We will be abiding by all the rules laid down by the Government of India regarding Covid-19 positive cases. The patient's contacts are being traced," DM Srivastava added.

With this, not only the tourism minister but the entire state cabinet, including the chief minister, has now come under lens as Maharaj had attended the recently-held cabinet meeting where all the ministers along with CM Trivendra Singh Rawat were present.

Notably, Amrita Rawat was state's tourism minister and also held other portfolios like Culture and Women’s Empowerment during Harish Rawat government. However, she was sacked by the former chief minister when she left the Congress to join the BJP.

Meanwhile, a 22-year-old youth who was tested positive from a private lab in Dehradun reached Government Doon Medical College and Hospital (GDMCH) on his scooter and asked the doctors to admit him. The boy, who claims to have no travelling history, informed the doctors that he might have caught the infection during his visit to the market. “The youth and his entire family have got themselves tested voluntarily and only he turned out to be positive,” Dehradun DM told TOI.

Among the 33 new cases, 21 were reported from Dehradun. “In Dehradun, seven contacts of a Covid-19 positive patient from Niranjanpur Sabzi Mandi were found infected with the virus. Further, 10 people who returned to the state from Maharashtra were also tested Covid-19 positive. Besides these, four other cases were also found in Dehradun,” informed additional secretary (health) Yugal Kishore Pant.

As over 249 cases have been found in the state in the last 40 hours, the health department is now struggling to keep hospital beds for the positive cases. The spike has been the sharpest in Dehradun and Nainital. The pendency of rate of medical reports is also increasing in Uttarakhand as the health department was awaiting sample results of over 5,200 cases on Saturday at the time of filing this report.

On the day, Nainital reported five new cases and 4 each were found in Haridwar and Tehri districts respectively. Among the 33 new cases reported on Saturday, 22 had returned from Maharashtra.

Dr NS Khatri, Covid-19 nodal officer from GDMCH, informed that that all the Covid-19 beds in the facility are currently occupied and the hospital administration is now turning wards dedicated for suspected Covid-19 patients into wards for active Covid-19 cases. “We are shifting suspected cases to our ENT ward to get 48 more beds for Covid-19 positive cases. Arrangements are also being made to shortlist at least 50 more beds where we can keep Covid-19 patients as cases are rising with each passing day,” he added.

The situation is no different at Dr Susheela Tiwari Medical College. Dr Arun Joshi, chief medical superintendent of the medical college in Haldwani informed that at present, over 200 beds of the hospital are occupied. Among these, 150 are Covid-19 positive cases and others are suspected cases. “We have the capacity to accommodate around 350 patients, both suspected and active. As cases are rising with each passing day, we are making attempts to ensure 500 beds in Covid-19 wards,” he added. 


