Ahmedabad: With unlock 1.0, air quality returns to ‘poor’ state
2020-06-05
AHMEDABAD: Air pollution levels have started to rise as the city wakes from the two-month slumber after lockdown. Machines have cranked up in factories and the cacophony of vehicles with their characteristic honking has already being witnessed on city streets. The Air Quality Index (AQI) for the city has started to inch slowly towards ‘poor’ from ‘moderate’ when compared to June 1 when unlock 1.0 came into force. Pirana and Rakhial areas continued to have high AQI score of 125 and 89 respectively indicating caution on Thursday. 

When Gujarat Pollution Control Board (GPCB) launched a comprehensive study on air pollution prior to the Janata Curfew and during the first phase of lockdown, it had found that in Vatva, for instance, in the days following the Janata Curfew on March 22 and lockdown, the PM2.5 (2.5 microns or less) reduced by 29.85%, carbon monoxide reduced by 17.80%, while sulphur dioxide had reduced by 87% while NO2 has reduced by 23%. 


 


The particulate matter pollution PM2.5 had dropped in Vatva from 82.83 micrograms per cubic meter to 31 on March 31. A real time AQI measurement tool AQI-India has indicated that Vatva GIDC area too has begun to witness a moderate rise in air pollution. 


The AQI for Ahmedabad city, as per central government’s System of Air Quality and Weather Forecasting and Research (SAFAR) tool on Thursday was a high of 83 during the day time while by evening the quality improved to AQI 78. Pirana dumpyard , which before the lockdown had an AQI of over 320, was now at a moderate at AQI of 80. The officials claim that it was mainly because there was no activity of waste segregation at present as the same has been stopped ever since the lockdown. 

Officials claim that city may have begun to see normal traffic and is yet to see a peak as heavy vehicles especially the buses and transport vehicles are still not on the road, because of which AQI was marked "moderate" and "satisfactory". The officials said that while earlier when there were over 1,000 buses of AMTS and BRT and state transport buses on the road, there are at present only 40% on the road and hence there has been a severe reduction in AQI.


