With Lockdown 3.0, testing in U’khand down by 50% although +ve cases continue
2020-05-06
Dehradun:　Even as the number of tests being done is picking pace in several states across the country, the Uttarakhand health department has considerably reduced the testing in the past one week. 347 samples were tested on April 29,　followed by 553 and 409 on April 30 and May 1 respectively. However, on May 2, the testing went down to 240 samples which further reduced to 201, 148 and 230 samples on May 3, 4 and 5 respectively.

City-based activist Anoop Nautiyal, who is closely monitoring Covid-19 related developments in the state told TOI that as per the data provided in the regular bulletins by the health department, the number of tests has reduced by almost 50% in past four days.

　"If we take out an average of tests done between April 28 to May 1, the outcome is 403 tests per day. The average of tests done between May 02 and May 05 is 205, just half of the earlier four days. Even if we see the number of samples tested in Uttarakhand weeks prior to April 28, not even a single day was there when less than 250 samples were tested," Nautiyal said. 

He added that with the government giving relaxations in lockdown and migrants returning, the situation will be very difficult for the health department to handle if testing was not ramped up. 

Interestingly, the testing has decreased even though two more labs started testing in Uttarakhand in the past fortnight.

Not just the samples tested, even the number of samples being collected for testing has reduced in the past 10 days while the number of positive cases are rising. To recall, the state has registered three Covid-19-positive cases in the past four days.

Commenting on the decline in testing, additional secretary (health) Yugal Kishore Pant said, "The number of samples sent for testing goes down during the　weekend as OPDs in hospitals remain closed which is also one of our primary source of information about Covid-19 patients. Also, one more reason for less testing in the past couple of days is that we had to shut the lab at Doon Hospital because of misplacement of a sample due to which the lab had to be sanitised.” He added that keeping in view the relaxation in lockdown, the rate of both sample collection and testing will pick up pace in the days to come.

Meanwhile, with seven cases of　Covid-19 reported from AIIMS Rishikesh in the past 10 days, the premier institute has turned into an epicentre of coronavirus outbreak in Uttarakhand.

Over 200 doctors and other healthcare workers are under quarantine within the institution, as per health officials.

Commenting on the matter, Pant told TOI that AIIMS Rishikesh has been asked to strictly follow the ‘infection prevention guidelines’ of the central government to prevent further outbreak.

　　　


