With 39 patients in a day, Agra, UP's Covid epicentre, now has 142 cases
2020-04-14
Agra: Agra, Uttar Pradesh’s Covid-19 epicentre, recorded 39 new cases on Monday, its highest single day hike ever, taking the total tally to 142 in the district — which is twice the number of cases in Noida which stands second in the state. Fresh patients in the district also included a junior doctor who had been serving at the isolation ward of SN Medical College (SNMC). 

In the wake of the rising number of Covid-19 cases in the district, the local administration has shifted 20 patients to similar facilities in the neighbouring districts to manage capacity. While 10 patients were earlier shifted to Vrindavan community health centre (CHC), another 10 were shifted to Mainpuri’s Bhogaon CHC on Monday. 

Meanwhile, the neighbouring Kasganj for the first time reported presence of Covid-19 infection, as three local residents tested positive. In Firozabad, the cases rose to 18, as two fresh cases were found positive. A staff nurse of a private hospital in Mathura tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday, taking the tally of patients in the district to five. 

Out of the 39 positive cases confirmed in Agra on Monday, 14 are direct contacts of a Fatehpur Sikri-based tourist guide who tested positive in Mathura on April 10. Five cases are related to staffers of a private hospital and their family members, another five are related to the family members of the patients of a private clinic where a doctor had also tested positive last week. The remaining are contacts of people who tested positive earlier, including those who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event at Delhi’s Nizamuddin.

Maintaining that the areas where these new patients lived have been sealed and the residents are being screened, chief medical officer Dr Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “It is very unfortunate that one junior doctor has got Covid-19 infection. We will be sending samples of all the doctors and paramedic staff serving at the isolation ward for lab testing."

With 14 new cases surfacing in one day, Fatehpur Sikri emerged as a major hotspot in the district. The two major hotspots in the city include a private hospital having 21 positive cases linked to it and a clinic in the Ghatiya Azam Khan locality with 10 cases linked to it. 

District magistrate Prabhu N Singh said, “The number of active cases in the district is 128. All the people who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patient are being screened. The area in the vicinity of the places where the infected people were staying is being sanitized. So far, we had marked 49 places in the district as coronavirus epicentres. Out of these, 10 have been neutralized. We are doing a massive sampling to identify all the infected patients and send them to institutional quarantine.” 


