With 42 cases in a day, Akola completes century of Covid-19 cases
2020-05-09
Nagpur: In the first eight days of May, Akola has registered 104 cases of Covid-19, including seven deaths. On Friday alone, 42 new cases were recorded, the highest single-day figure from here so far. Three of the seven deceased were undergoing Covid-19 treatment at isolation ward of Akola GMCH. 

Akola has total 137 cases of Covid-19, including 11 deaths and one suicide, so far. This clearly indicates that it has emerged as the biggest hotspot of Covid-19 after Nagpur. Total 14 patients have been discharged so far.

The number of Covid-19 deaths in Akola is another cause of concern. Earlier, Amravati had registered 11 Covid-19 deaths. But Akola recorded its 12th death on May 8. More serious is the fact that four of these 12 deaths happened during treatment in the isolation ward of the Covid hospital in city. The other seven deceased had tested positive for Covid-19 post death. 

A 30-year-old patient had committed suicide after being tested as Covid-19 positive on April 10. This is the only suicide by a Covid-19 positive patient in Vidarbha. 

Another worrying factor for Akola is the local spread of Covid-19. First patient was reported from Baidpura while second from Akot Fail area, both densely populated localities of Akola city. The spread was limited to these two localities and nearby Akot town till April 30. 

In May, cases have been reported from old city, sarafa bazaar, Mohd Ali road, Radhakisan plots, old Tarfail, Gulzar Pura, Alashi plot and Mominpura etc. Till May 8, more than 14 localities in Akola have reported Covid-19 patients. 

The patients include five health workers who had treated a Covid-19 patient in a private hospital for respiratory disorder. This patient was detected Covid-19 positive post death. All five health workers hail from different localities of city and they came into contact of many people. 

After this incidence, district collector Jitendra Papalkar announced complete lockdown in Akola for two days on May 4 and 5. As many as eight localities in Akola have been completely sealed since May 4. 

Following the lockdown, the collector had come up with a unique odd-even scheme for shops and markets. But it had to be withdrawn following heavy public demand. “Under odd-even scheme, shops would have remained open on odd dates and closed on even dates. But, after discussion with several merchant bodies, we came to a conclusion that shops of essential services will remain open from 8am to 4pm daily,” said Papalkar. Even wine shops in rural Akola are open.


