With corona cases rising, citizens support lockdown extension
2020-04-13
Nagpur: Despite the difficulties, most citizens welcome the extension of lockdown upto April 30 announced by Maharashtra government. The extension was announced by chief minister Uddhav Thackeray on Saturday.

TOI spoke to a cross section of citizens to find out their response. Writer Waqil Nazeeb believes the spread of coronavirus is increasing in the city rapidly, hence lockdown is the best solution, “The issue is getting serious and lockdown will make sure remain strictly grounded inside their homes and are safeguarded from the threat of the virus,” he said.

Mobile repair shops, electronics shops, and other small services should be kept open for at least four hours and people must follow social-distancing while visiting these places, as these shop owners and labourers have no source of income and the situation is grim for them, Nazeeb said.

Citizens said extending the lockdown was the need of the hour. They also said spreading of hate messages, forwards etc was against the seriousness of the situation and diverting many people’s mind towards communal hatred.

“In this time of crisis, humanity has become one. The virus does not discriminate while infecting the person. If government wants to take stricter measures, we will stand with them. We have an opportunity to go out and buy grocery and essential commodities. So we should not violate the rules,” said Aashish Maske, construction consultant.

Komal Gorle Kashikar, a doctor, stands with the lockdown and urges people not to go out if they want to remain healthy and happy. “I surely wanted the lockdown extended, it was necessary. I think people must act smartly about stocking groceries and essential stuff. Keeping children and others engaged in creative activities is always good. It’s all about living,” she said.

Shubhangi Bhadbhade, a writer, said, “Lockdown will assure people do not go out and are safe from any contamination. It is very sad that a lot of major events and occasions are getting cancelled because of this, but nothing is more important than life. Hence we all must stand with the decision of the PM and support the decision cautiously,’’ she said.

Akshata Nakshine, a law student, said it was an alarming situation for the country. It was time for all to stand together and follow the lockdown. Government was doing enough to supply essential goods, food and safety. “We must stay inside for those doctors and welfare of everyone,” he added.


