With plastic as Covid-19 shield, Delhi’s Madhu Vihar police station goes ‘contactless’
2020-05-17
NEW DELHI: In a first, east Delhi’s Madhu Vihar police station has initiated contactless policing after several officers tested positive for the novel coronavirus. This will ensure minimal exposure of the uniformed personnel to the citizens without affecting policing responsibilities.


Jasmeet Singh, DCP (East), elaborated, “Four teams have been formed to implement the contactless policing system. The first team has officers working at the police station, commuting daily between home and the police station. Another team will be on picket duty, a third will include those who patrol their specific beats. Members of these two teams will also commute between police station and home or guesthouse accommodation. The fourth team comprising 15 officers will stay at home for 10 days in reserve to attend to emergencies if some of the officers get infected.” 

Inspector Rajeev Kumar, SHO of Madhu Vihar police station, said that people coming to the police station have to first dip their footwear in a disinfectant solution at the gate. Then they proceed towards an automatic system of a 20-second handwash. This is followed by thermal scanning. The duty officer is the first point of contact at every police station, and an automatic sensor sanitiser has been placed outside the entrance. 

“Any room that is likely to see a public interface will have temporary partitions,” Kumar disclosed. The complaint room has been covered with transparent plastic sheets that act as a barrier between the complainants and the police officers attending to them. In case anyone wants to show a document or their identity details, the officer will take a picture of the document furnished before the complaint is submitted online. The receipt number is sent on the mobile phone. All documents submitted will undergo a protocol of sanitisation for 24 hours before they are put into the files. 

The SHO stated that if on a given day, more people visited the station and some of them were unable to meet the officers concerned, then the said officers, including the SHO, would try to make a video call to them. “People want to meet officers face to face to reassure themselves that their complaints have been heard,” said Kumar. “Whenever too many people come to the station, we note their contact numbers and call them on WhatsApp video. We will be encouraging people to minimise physical interaction and instead file online complaints or make video calls in case of any issue.” 

If anyone has work in other units, such as the record room, malkhana or the reader room, they will not be allowed to go there themselves, but will have their work facilitated by the police station staff. During the lockdown most of the calls and cases have pertained to family disputes, minor quarrels and neighbourhood fights. 

Beyond all these special measures, sanitisation of the police station is routinely carried out each and every day. 


