With 13 patients, Indore hotspot of state’s Covid-19 outbreak
2020-03-27
Bhopal: Six more patients tested positive for Coronavirus in the state on Thursday, one of whom, an elderly Indorean, died. There were three other cases in Indore, and one each in Ujjain and Shivpuri districts.

Indore seems to be turning out to Madhya Pradesh’s Covid-19 hotspot with 13 cases detected in just two days – accounting for half of the state’s 26 cases.

Three of Indore’s new patients are from Ranipura – the locality where the 65-year-old who died on Thursday lived. Two of them are girls, aged 14 and 18 – making them the youngest Covid-19 patients in Madhya Pradesh. They have been admitted to MY Hospital.

The third, a 41-year-old man, is admitted to CHL Hospital. And the fourth patient, a 53-year-old, is from Limbodi area. “Both are men, who don’t have any travel or contact history. I am gathering details of the female patients,” said MGM Medical College PRO Dr Rahul Rokade.

The entire state is in lockdown and curfew is in force in five cities – Bhopal, Indore, Jabalpur, Gwalior and Ujjain.

The Shivpuri patient had arrived from Hyderabad recently and posted a video on social media, saying “he feels he has symptoms of Covid-19”. He urged officials to get him tested. The administration took note of the video and sent a team to check.

He was put in home quarantine and swab samples taken, which came back positive on Thursday. 

He was immediately shifted to a hospital isolation ward where Shivpuri district’s first Coronavirus patient is also being treated. His family members have been put on home quarantine and are being observed.

In Gwalior, officials were shocked when railway officials informed them that around 590 people have boarded a goods train at Mathura and reached Gwalior railway station. 

When the train did not stop, they started shouting and the Gwalior stationmaster got the train to stop.

“Majority of these people were from Bhind and Morena districts. They were daily labourers who got stranded. We ensured proper screening and also gave them food. The administration of their districts have made arrangements to take them home,” Gwalior division commissioner M B Ojha told TOI.

“Exodus from nearby districts both inwards and outwards is seen in great numbers, we are ensuring proper testing of each and every individual,” he added.

Officials of Bhind and Morena districts sent teams to take them home. “They are being brought back. Some buses are still en route to Morena. About 200 of the 590 people were from Morena,” collector Priyanka Das told TOI. She added, “This is an issue in the district, but local people are responding and informing about any such possible suspect patients.”

In Morena district, Congress MLA from Sabalgarh, Baijnath Kushwaha, his driver, gunman, and family members have been put in home isolation, though he doesn’t have any symptoms. He was at the press conference in Bhopal on March 20, which was attended by a journalist who has turned out to be Covid-positive.

Officials said the condition of the six patients in Jabalpur is stable.


