With 34 new cases, Bihar Covid tally surges to 1,033
2020-05-16
Patna: Bihar reported 34 new Covid-19 cases on Friday, taking the total number of cases in the state to 1,033. So far, 440 people have recovered and seven have died and active cases stand at 586. 

The total number of cases in Patna reached the 100 mark on Friday after a 26-year-old woman from Digha tested positive for the virus.

As per information shared by state health department principal secretary Sanjay Kumar, the maximum number of cases on Friday were reported from Madhepura (7) followed by five each in Khagaria and Siwan and three in Saharsa. Two other cases were reported from Vaishali, Kishanganj, Jamui, Supaul and Madhubani and one case each was reported from Sirdala in Nawada, Digha in Patna, Mohadinagar in Lakhisarai and Ara in Bhojpur district.

Sources said over 95% of the positive cases are that of migrants who have recently returned. According to Sanjay, a strategy is being worked out to tackle the increase in the number of positive Covid-19 cases with the inflow of migrants to Bihar.

Seeing the large inflow of migrants and many of them testing positive, Patna DM Kumar Ravi said additional quarantine centres will be set up at block level. “We will also be making quarantine centres at panchayat and village level,” he added. 

He further said, “Those coming from red zones like Delhi and Maharashtra will be kept at block level quarantine centres, while those coming from places having less Covid-19 cases will be in panchayat-level centres and those coming from green zone will be kept in village quarantine.” 

He added that the woman from Digha, who tested on Friday, has a comorbidity and is admitted at the Patna Medical College and Hospital (PMCH) for treatment.

Altogether 44 Covid-19 positive have recovered in Patna and two have died so far. Also among those who have tested positive in Patna, 28 are migrants. 

Ravi further said those stuck in different parts of state could give information on district help line number 0612-2219090.


