With lockdown, pollution levels dip in Kochi
2020-03-26
KOCHI: With vehicular traffic almost coming to a standstill, the pollution levels in the city, especially nitrogen oxide levels, recorded a drastic fall on Wednesday, as per Kerala state pollution control board (KSPCB) data.

“We have noticed a drastic fall in the vehicular pollution levels and respirable suspended particulate matter (RSPM) in all our stations, mainly at Vyttila and MG Road which often record the highest levels because of the huge traffic movement,” said KSPCB chief environmental engineer M A Baiju.

According to Vyttila air monitoring station data, the pollution levels crossed 100 microns for nitrogen oxide (NOX) –– a parameter that indicates high emissions from vehicles –– in the first couple of weeks in March. The dust pollution levels indicated by PM 10 (particulate matter) were also very high in this region. The standard for NOX is 80 microns in 24 hours while it is 100 microns for PM 10 in 24 hours.

But from the days the lockdown began, the pollution levels fell by as many as 30 points for nitrogen oxide, indicating that the air was getting cleaner due to vehicular traffic coming down drastically.

“Our air quality index is comparatively good because of our climate. Normally in summer, the RSPM remains high because there is no rain or winds to clear the air. The main pollutants for us are vehicles and the construction sector. Since construction activity has come down due to the Covid situation, we are seeing a drastic fall in particulate matter levels too,” Baiju said.

According to the data recorded by the KSPCB, the PM 10 levels touched 211 microns on March 7, 173 on March 6 and 166 on March 8. The highest recorded in the last 10 days being on March 17, at 161 microns. The fall in levels began from March 20 (96) and it has been falling steadily since then.

Interestingly, at MG Road, the PM 2.5 levels showed a rise from 17 microns on March 22 to 31 microns on March 24, during the lockdown period. There is a growing concern that this could be because of people burning waste at night times. With waste collection affected by the confusion caused due to Corona scare and social distancing, people have been seen burning plastic and other waste at several points in their own neighbourhoods.

