With Covid-19 not abating, NTCA for continued closure of tiger reserves
2020-04-23
Nagpur: With Covid-19 cases continuing to rise, the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has asked the states to keep tiger reserves and parks closed indefinitely.

TOI on Wednesday reported opposition by even guides and Gypsy drivers against reopening of parks owing to Covid-19 scare.

NTCA member-secretary Anup Kumar Nayak said, “The decision should not be looked upon as anti-tourism. In the light of limited knowledge of the virus vis-a-vis its human community transmission besides possibility of transmission from humans to animals, it is advised to keep the parks closed until further orders.”

Nayak said, “Though the lockdown has been extended till May 3, after consulting several wildlife experts, I feel the parks should not be opened till Covid-19 is completely eliminated from the country. We have 75% of the world’s tiger population and you never know about the lurking danger.”

NTCA officials dropped enough hints to close the parks during this tourism season which ends in June. “By October, when new tourism season starts, we hope things will be better,” they told TOI.

Maharashtra PCCF (wildlife) Nitin H Kakodkar stated, “Obviously we are not in a position to start tourism immediately and plan to keep the parks closed till May 15. We’ll take a call on whether to continue closure of parks after that.”

On day-long machan (water hole) census on Buddha Pournima on May 7-8, Kakodkar said, “We will withdraw the orders on conducting Nisarga Anubhav. Though we can still conduct the exercise by staff, the basic purpose is to inculcate liking about forest and wildlife among people.”

Anish Andheria, president, Wildlife Conservation Trust (WCT), welcomed NTCA decision. “National parks, sanctuaries and tiger reserves should remain closed for the remainder of the 2020 summer tourist season. We cannot afford to catalyse congregation of people and increase the spread among tourists, hotel staff, wildlife and the frontline forest staff, who are extremely important for protecting our forests,” he said.

Andheria added, “Currently, because of remoteness, the virus has not spread among frontline staff. However, with tourists going to these parks, there is likelihood the staff will get exposed to the virus and may need to be quarantined, leaving our parks unguarded. The lockdown has resulted in reverse migration of labour force and villagers, thereby increasing their dependence on forests for subsistence.” 

On the other hand, executive director of Tour Operators for Tigers India (TOFT) Vishal Singh said NTCA was issuing directives but doing nothing to take care of guides and locals who are completely dependent on tourism. “I feel with Covid-19, the restriction of tourism in 20% of the park area should be removed so vehicles are distributed widely. Secondly, lodges can be operated with 50% of their capacity and restrictions should be imposed on tourists from hotspots. Visitors should be allowed inside only after thermal scanning. Some guidelines need to be issued by NTCA to strike a balance,” said Singh.

Andheria said, “During these unprecedented times, we need vigilance of our forest guards and watchers more than ever before to avoid a disproportionately high number of offenses against forest and wildlife, and also to attend to increasing instances of human-wildlife conflict.”

“I insist that both state governments and MoEFCC should issue directives regarding closure of India’s parks for tourism for the remaining of this summer season,” he said.


