With 300 cops on duty, 2.2k challans issued in two days for defying lockdown
2020-04-23
Bareilly: The traffic police department of Bareilly has intensified its efforts to prevent locals from violating Covid-19 lockdown norms in the city. Over 2,000 challans were issued to motorists in the past two days for roaming aimlessly on the roads.

Around 300 traffic police personnel - homeguards, constables, traffic sub-inspectors (TSI) and inspectors - have been deputed at key junctions and in city interiors to ensure compliance of rules. Officials at traffic police department said that around 5,000 vehicles are being intercepted in parts of the city daily. And legal action initiated on the erring ones. 

On Wednesday, Bareilly's superintendent of police (SP-traffic) Subhash Gangwar told TOI, “As many as 2,147 challans have been issued against violating motorists. On Tuesday, 1,148 challans were issued, while on Wednesday, there were 999 challans. Hundreds of vehicles are being intercepted every day - inside the city as well as on its outskirts. Strict action is being taken against the violaters." 

The SP-traffic added, "Motorists who fail to give a genuine reason or are caught wandering around will face legal actions - both from civil and traffic police. We have stepped up our enforcement measures across the city to ensure proper implementation of the lockdown.” 

The SP-traffic further said, “Around 300 traffic policemen, including TSI, inspectors, constables, among others, are deployed in parts of the city. Cops are repeatedly appealing to locals to stay at home. In the past two days, five vehicles were spotted defying lockdown. They were seized and Rs 13,000 recovered as fines.” 

Special focus is on areas where shopkeepers and traders were given permission by district administration to operate their businesses in the morning hours. The SP-traffic also said, “Areas such as Shyamganj and Delapir where grocery stores and vegetable markets are located, are being watched carefully - with market-owners allowed to open shops briefly in the morning. Traffic personnel are on their toes to ensure social distancing is being followed.”


