Telangana: With lockdown, no Ramzan bounty for hawkers this year
2020-04-25
HYDERABAD: Ramzan and the days in the run-up to the Muslim month of fasting is the period when daily wage earners, petty traders and hawkers make an extra earning. But with the lockdown, many lost not only their regular earning but also the extra income, reveals a study based on door-to-door survey in slums south of the river Musi.


The study revealed that about 85% of the habitants of urban slums in the old city are daily wagers and work in the informal sector. A little over half (56%) of them work in ‘kirana’ or grocery stores, hotels, welding and mechanic shops, and as push cart vendors, electricians, plumbers, centring labour, factory labour and cooks.

The most affected, however, are the auto drivers, who constitute 24% of the daily wagers. Less the 8% work on salaried jobs like security, salesmen in retail shops, car drivers, DCM drivers, and other blue-collar jobs. According to the study, 12% of women, who are mostly widows, work as housemaids and do menial ‘karchob’ (hand embroidery) or ‘zari’ (brocade) work on low daily wages.

The study was conducted by city-based NGO, Helping Hand Foundation (HHF), to find out the impact of lockdown on daily wagers in urban slums particularly with reference to Ramzan. The study revealed that 41% of auto drivers have more than one member in the family with health issues. “About two-third of auto drivers stay in rented houses and 83% have white cards that make them eligible for subsidised ration through public distribution system and Arogyasri. A significant number of daily wagers are at high risk of slipping into poverty in the present circumstances,” it said.

HHF managing trustee Mujtaba Hasan Askari told TOI that with a high density of population and closed clusters, the old city is also vulnerable to novel coronavirus spread. “Tight containment and provision of supplies will need to be balanced well,” he said adding that the only silver lining in this crisis, expressed by one-third of the households, is their out-of-pocket expenses have come down due to closure of eateries, hotels, push card food vendors.

As roadside eateries and push card food vendors have closed, preparing food at home is returning to slums after a long time. Almost two-third of auto drivers stated that in normal times they face huge challenges in meeting rent, food, education and medical expenses of their families. They said the lockdown has made their life miserable.


