Coronavirus outbreak: Without testing negative, Karnataka students can’t leave Italy
2020-03-12
BENGALURU: Unable to procure Covid-19 (negative) certificate mandated by the Indian government to enter the country, several students from Karnataka are stranded in airports of Rome and Milan in Italy, which is under lockdown in the wake of the viral epidemic.



Coronavirus outbreak live updates

TOI spoke to the stranded youths, mostly students in Italian universities, who said getting a clean chit from the stretched Italian healthcare establishment is impossible and they can’t even venture out from wherever they are holed up due to fear of fine and imprisonment.


According to the students, there are at least 20 of them from Karnataka stranded in Rome, Milan and Genoa airports. An estimated 200 Indians are stranded in airports in Italy, they said.

On Tuesday, the Indian government ordered that whoever wants to board flights to India from Covid-19-hit countries like Italy and South Korea must get a medical certificate confirming they have tested negative for the virus.

Speaking to the TOI from Malpensa Airport in Milan, S Karthik of Tumakuru said he had purchased a ticket to fly home on an Air India flight on Tuesday evening but was prevented from boarding the aircraft. “I was asked to produce the Covid-19 (negative) certificate in order to fly out. The authorities don’t realise it is impossible to find clinics or doctors as Italy has sounded a red alert for the virus and the entire country is under lockdown. Hospitals are overcrowded and have strictly told us that people without symptoms can’t be tested. We are caught between the devil and deep sea,” the IT student said.

According to Karthik, over 50 people are stranded at the Milan airport alone and they can’t even venture out as there is a standing order since Tuesday against people leaving the premises without valid reasons. Violators can be arrested and fined 200 euros, he said.

The hunt for the certificate and visit to medical facilities in Italy only render individuals more vulnerable to the virus, he added.


Indian authorities unhelpful

The students also claimed that they were advised to call the helpline of the Indian ministry of external affairs, which in turn directed them to contact the Indian embassy or the consulate in Italy. “But when we contacted the embassy, we were told that the new rule (demanding Covid-19 [negative] certificate) is being strictly followed as per government instructions,” said Ashish, who is from Shivamogga and stranded at the Milan airport.

Over 75 Indians are stranded in Rome and they include many from Karnataka. “Local Indian authorities have not paid heed to our pleas. We are being turned away from hospitals here as we don’t have any symptoms. Most students have an Indian medical insurance which is not valid here. We want to come home and are ready to be quarantined in our country,” said Madan Gowda, a student stranded at the airport in Rome along with 61 other Indian students since Tuesday evening.

In a similar case, many Indian students, including 10 from Karnataka, who boarded an Alitalia flight from Genoa airport in northwestern Italy on Wednesday were allegedly forced out following orders from Indian embassy officials as they lacked Covid-19-negative certificate, sources said. Indian mission authorities in Rome were not available for comment till Wednesday evening.

