Goa: Without regular professional care, special children struggle during lockdown
2020-04-01
PANAJI: One section that is feeling the impact of restriction on movement during the lockdown is children with special needs and their parents. Fifteen-year-old Guirim-resident Mahiya Vernekar, who has cerebral palsy, is growing restless being constantly indoors. She cannot make the weekly visit to her grandmother’s house in Mapusa. Parents of the Anand Niketan student, Mahiya, are also concerned over her not getting physiotherapy sessions.


“Mahiya has become naughtier and restless since being restricted indoors. We used to take her to her grandmother’s place in Mapusa once a week, besides, taking her for a joyride to Panaji. That kept her in good spirits. She is missing her physiotherapy and speech therapy. But we cannot do anything about the current situation, we have to deal with it,” Mahiya’s father Ramesh Vernekar said.

Special educator Snehal Verenkar is one of the founders of the Grey Blend Foundation, which offers services of special educators at homes across North Goa at a nominal cost. Since the novel coronavirus threat, many parents have themselves opted out of the service to avoid any possibility of infection.

In cases where parents have expressed the need to continue the service, most of the Foundation’s special educators and therapists are unable to travel as they are dependent on public transport.

“I have received calls from three parents already who said there is increase in behavioural problems in their autistic children. Autistic children don’t like their routine to be changed and when schools will open now after a long time it will take an extra effort to bring these children back on track. Parents do not have the same skills of special educators to deal with the children and we can be of limited help over the phone,” Snehal said.

She said that the lockdown has led to shortage of some food items and this is especially tough to deal with for parents of special children.

“One parent was frantically calling me today to ask where she can get biscuits from. Biscuits and other bakery products form a major part of her child’s diet and the special child is having trouble adjusting to rice and dal meals. Many special children do not understand verbal instructions, and special educators can help in convincing them,” Snehal said.

She said special educators are providing parents tips like how to engage children with autism with visuals such as cartoons on TV and picture books.

Headmaster of Sanjay School for Special Children in Porvorim, and with centres in Curchorem and Vasco, Tatu Kudalkar said that parents also have the added burden of taking extra care of their special children during this period, as many of these children have lower immunity.

“Children with cerebral palsy need physiotherapy on a regular basis. Without it, their muscles tighten and then you are back to square one once they return to school. We were considering arranging for such children and the physiotherapist to come to the school during the lockdown for continuity in therapy. But it was felt that it is not advisable as the immunity of many of the children is low. The older students at our vocational centre too have to deal with having nothing to keep them busy at home,” Kudalkar said. 

