With 12 fresh cases of Covid-19, Agra tally is 384
2020-04-28
AGRA: At least 12 fresh cases of novel coronavirus surfaced in Agra on Wednesday, taking the district tally to 384.

Out of these, five cases are relating to the family of an excise department employee who was tested positive on April 23 while one of the cases is related to a sanitation worker of SN Medical College. A vegetable wholesaler was also among them.

Chief medical officer Mukesh Kumar Vats said, “All the 12 new Covid-19 patients have been shifted to an isolation ward. A team of doctors is attending to them. People are being screened in the area around their houses and the places they had visited. Their contacts are being identified. We will conduct a health checkup on all these people.”

The localities from where the new cases surfaced on Monday include Namner, Bagh Mujjafar Khan, Shahganj, Belanganj, Kedar Nagar and Baluganj. 

According to the health department, out of the 327 cases which have surfaced in Agra, at least 104 are related to people who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat event in Delhi and their contacts.

92 cases are linked to a private hospital on the National Highway 2. Another, 25 cases are related to a private hospital in Rakabganj locality and a clinic. 58 cases are related to health care workers and their contacts. While 26 cases are linked to people who had overseas travel history and their contacts. 

Meanwhile, five more Covid-19 patients were declared cured of the infection and discharged from hospital. 

“So far 54 people have been cured of the infection and discharged from hospital. All the people who had come in contact with any Covid-19 patients are being screened. The area in the vicinity of the places where the infected people were staying is being sanitized. 14 spots have been completely neutralized. 30 active hostspots are being closely monitored. We are doing massive sampling in these areas to identify all the infected patients and send them to institutional quarantine,” the CMO said. 


