With four more deaths, Covid-19 toll in Rajasthan breaches 150 mark
2020-05-22
JAIPUR: Four persons died while 212 others including 151 migrants tested positive for Covid-19 bringing the infected count to 6,227 in the state on Thursday. 

While two deaths were reported from Jaipur, one each tok place in Sikar and Bharatpur. As of now, the state’s casualty figure stands at 151 while that of the state capital at 75. 

A 67-year-old man from Halena of Bharatpur, who had suffered from a stroke, died at his home on May 19. A 70-year-old woman, resident of Chandeli Ka Bas of Dantaramgarh in Sikar district, was admitted to Sawai Man Singh Hospital in Jaipur on May 18 and died on Wednesday. She had suffered head injuries in an accident. An 85-year-old man, resident of Chaura Rasta of Jaipur, admitted to SMS Hospital on May 15 died on Thursday. He was suffering from co-morbid conditions of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. One 57-year-old man from Purani Basti of Jaipur, who was brought to SMS Hospital on Wednesday, died on the same day. Health department officials said that he did not have any co-morbid conditions. 

SMS Hospital administration has taken an initiative for providing death certificates of those who died there to families. 

Districts which reported cases are Dungarpur (42), Jalore (22), Jaipur (21), Nagaur (16), Jodhpur (14), Udaipur (13) Bhilwara (10), Pali (10), Sirohi (8), Churu (8), Rajsamand (7), Ajmer (7), Barmer (6), Bikaner (6), Sikar (5), Alwar (4), Pratapgarh (3), Jaisalmer (2), Jhunjhunu (2), Kota (2), Chittorgarh (1), Bharatpur (1), Jhalawar (1), and one from another state.

In Jaipur, more inmates of central and district jails tested positive. Eight inmates were found infected with the virus in central jail while three were from district jail. However, one each case was found in Murlipura, Jhotwara, Kachhi Basti of Jawahar Nagar, Renwal, Lalasar, Ghat Gate, Surajpole Bazaar, Adarsh Nagar, Shastri Nagar and Mina Pada. 

Overpriced masks, claims ex-health minister 

Former health minister and Malviya Nagar MLA Kalicharan Saraf on Thursday said he had written to chief minister Ashok Gehlot to bring into his notice about the corruption in purchasing masks by the state government. Saraf said in 2018, the state government had a deal of supplying masks at 88 paisa eash. The tenure of contract of supply was to end in June 2020. But, the company broke the contract and stopped supply. 

He said no action was taken against the company and despite that they decided to sign a fresh contract with another company to buy masks at Rs 6.5 per mask. “The masks costing Rs 19.2 lakh were bought for Rs 1.25 crore,” said Saraf, appealing to the state government to take action against officials involved in it. He also appealed to the state government to blacklist companies involved in it. 

Quarantine troubles

A leader of employees’ union of 108 ambulances response services was allegedly picked up from his home and sent to a quarantine facility at a private university on Thursday. The leader alleged that the officials present at the university did not take him inside saying they did not receive any instructions to quarantine him. However, the leader of the employees alleged that since he had raised his voice in support of an ambulance driver, who was tested positive for Covid-19, he was facing all this.


