With 4 more coronavirus cases, 25 test posituve at Nagpur quarantine centres
2020-04-19
NAGPUR: Around 25 people placed under institutional quarantine have tested positive for Covid-19 so far in the city.

Hardly five positive patients – a cap seller, a Chandrapur-based couple, a 25-year-old Gittikhadan resident and a 61-year-old man from Kanhan — belong to the over 200 Delhi/foreign returnees who were traced through their digital footprints and quarantined since April 1. They had opposed the move saying they had already completed 14-day self-isolation after returning from/via Delhi.

Rest of the 20 positive patients found at quarantine centres were close contacts of Takia, Santranjipura and Tablighi Jamaat cases.

As numbers swelled, the Nagpur Municipal Corporation’s (NMC) isolated yet to be tested suspects with Delhi returnees who had already tested negative. This created anxiety among the negative persons about getting infected through suspected cases as they had also spent more than 14-days in the city after returning.

Asked if people can turn positive even after 14 days, civil surgeon Dr Devendra Paturkar told TOI, “A variation may be possible but the range is as yet not officially decided.” He was referring to the phenomenon of people being found positive even after 14 days.

“The (official) range mentioned is two to 14 days,” Dr Paturkar clarified.

Divisional commissioner Dr Sanjeev Kumar said someone who tests negative can be positive later in institutional quarantine. “It means he had infection before he came but was detected positive a few days after that. That’s why even after a negative test in the beginning we insisted on quarantining them,” he said.

Regarding more than one person sharing a room or halls, Dr Kumar said, “We are shifting people to other places and searching for new ones. In institutional quarantine, chances of infection are very low. Police have been instructed to go on rounds and check people are in their rooms and not loitering.”

Infectious disease specialist Dr Ashwini Tayade too said, “Late clearance of virus and prolonged shedding is known. The 14-day incubation period is average, but there is a possibility of variation in it.”

According to her, the protocols are strict enough to avoid close contact between people in institutional quarantine facilities. “If they follow the protocols fully, merely staying together and sharing rooms will not get them infected. Social distancing, hand hygiene and using masks during quarantine are very important points,” she added.

Ten positive persons were found at MLA hostels, the biggest quarantine facility in the city, followed by eight from Lonara, two each from Ravi Bhavan and Symbiosis. Takia Deewanshah cap seller was the first person to test positive while in institutional quarantine at Vanamati. He was in the Delhi list received by NMC.

In a series of reports, TOI had highlighted the apprehensions of people at these centres. Quarantine centre incharges had tough time keeping situation under control when most of them had tested negative but were forced to share rooms with untested ones. They even accused the administration of keeping them to inflate the numbers of suspects isolated.

