With 40 new cases, U’khand’s Covid　tally touches 357
2020-05-26
Dehradun: With 40 new cases reported on Monday, the Covid tally in Uttarakhand has now reached 357. Of the 40 new cases, 14 are passengers of the Mumbai-Haridwar Shramik Special which had reached Haridwar last week. According to the health department, Nainital and Haridwar reported nine new Covid-19 cases each on May 25, followed by nine new cases in Tehri, five in US Nagar and three in Pauri. While Chamoli and Champawat reported two new cases each, Pithoragarh and Dehradun reported one new Covid positive each on Monday.

“Of the nine patients from Haridwar, six are passengers of Shramik Special. Till now, the total count of positive cases from the Mumbai-Haridwar Shramik Special has reached 101,” said Abhishek Tripathi, in-charge of Covid-19 control room at the health directorate. With the rise of over 250 cases in past 10 days, the doubling rate of Covid cases in the state is now 3.98 days while the recovery rate has dropped to 17.68%. Meanwhile, the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Rishikesh, which claimed to have 1,500 samples pending, has started deep-freezing the new samples being given to them. The premier institute has also transferred three Covid patients to Doon Hospital. Authorities of Doon Hospital said that the patients were transferred from AIIMS due to unavailability of beds in the Covid ward at AIIMS.

However, public relations officer of AIIMS (Rishikesh) Harish Thapliyal refuted the allegations that the patients were moved to Doon Hospital becaus there was paucity of beds at AIIMS. 

He pointed out that the hospital has been made a ‘super facility’ Covid treatment centre for five districts and even patients of Dehradun are being moved to AIIMS which is why some patients were sent to Doon Hospital. “We have 25 positive cases under treatment while 65 suspected cases are in isolation in the 100-bed facility. We are expecting a spurt in cases in the next few days, hence, we have already mooted a plan to increase 100 beds each for positive and suspected cases,” he said. 


