With over 30 positive cases, SRA building in Bhavani Peth turns into coronavirus hotspot
2020-05-17
Pune: A building in the slum rehabilitation authority (SRA) project at Bhavani Peth has turned into a Covid-19 hotspot with over 30 positive cases detected so far. 

The Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) has swung into action after the cases were identified from a single building. The swabs of over 250 residents have been collected so far while the residents are being shifted to another SRA building located in the same premises to ensure social distancing and prevent further spread of the coronavirus.

There are five SRA buildings located in the area, of which three building are meant for transit housing. The building, where the residents were found to be positive for Covid-19, has been sealed and the administration is collecting the swabs of all 600 residents as a precautionary measure. Grocery kits have been distributed to every household to ensure that the residents remain indoors.

Confirming the detection of cases, PMC municipal commissioner Shekhar Gaikwad said that the situation remains under control and the area is being closely monitored. “We immediately decided to shift people to the adjacent building that is vacant. Contact tracing has been done and high risk contacts are being kept in separate rooms. People are cooperating to tackle the situation,” Gaikwad said. 

A PMC official said that people have been asked not to step out of their homes. Further, the administration has also planned to conduct medical checks of people with co-morbidities and senior citizens residing in nearby buildings.

The maximum number of positive cases in PMC limits have been reported from slums and densely populated pockets. As per an estimate, around 40% of the population in the municipal limit resides in slums. 

The execution of SRA schemes has been on a slow track, which has led to an expansion of slum pockets. Urban planning experts have been advocating SRA projects to curtail unauthorized slums and provide better amenities to citizens.

Local corporator Arvind Shinde said that slum pockets and SRA schemes have reported a significant number of Covid-19 cases. “This is mainly because following social distancing norms has been a major challenge in the slums. Even in SRA buildings, the flats are smaller in size, which could lead to defying of social distancing norms. The administration has to pay more attention to slum pockets,” he said.


