Withhold forest and eco clearances amid pandemic: Experts urge minister
2020-05-14
NAGPUR: Over 200 intellectuals, researchers, wildlife and forest experts have moved Union environment minister Prakash Javadekar to withhold forest and environmental clearances during the Covid-19 pandemic.


Covid-19 outbreak and subsequent lockdown across the nation have created extraordinary challenges for India’s citizens and for governance. The measures that the government has taken to adapt to this unprecedented situation include a shift to online platforms for consultation and decision-making. 

“However, these measures are still inadequate and we have grave concerns about the manner in which forest and environment clearances are being granted during this pandemic,” they said.

Among the signatories include former National Board for Wildlife (NBWL) members MK Ranjitsinh, AJT Johnsingh, Asad Rahmani, Belinda Wright, Bittu Sahgal, Biswajit Mohanty, Kishor Rithe, Prerna Singh Bindra, Claude Alvares, Divyabhanusinh Chavda, Praveen Bhargav, Shekar Dattatri and others.

The central government and various statutory authorities are under orders of apex court to ensure that forest and environment clearances comply strictly with the guidelines laid down in the Lafarge Judgment of 2011. 

“Meeting via videoconferencing handicaps such authorities from carrying out the roles that they are mandated to fulfil by the Supreme Court. Therefore, the decisions taken at the 57th meeting of the standing committee of NBWL on April 7, 2020 related to 31 proposals affecting 15 tiger reserves, sanctuaries, notified eco-sensitive zones (ESZ), deemed ESZs on the fringes of protected area and designated wildlife corridors must not be implemented and must be visited afresh following due process after the end of the pandemic,” they said.

First, site inspections, which are a crucial component of project evaluation, are very difficult to implement during a pandemic. Appraisals and assessments for clearance are being reduced to an mere formality, lacking credibility. Site inspections may be necessary and it is inconceivable that clearances can be granted in all cases without site inspections by experts.

Second, due to the national lockdown since March 25, the ministry appears to be relying only on digital documents uploaded by project developers on single-window clearance portal — Parivesh.

Supreme Court guidelines have specifically pointed out that identification of an area as forest solely based on the declaration by the user agency is leading to fait accompli situations. The compliance of these norms may not be possible during the lockdown which may amount to a serious deviation in the clearance process.

Under normal circumstances, project developers would be expected to provide documents that elucidate a project’s impact on environment for clarification during in-person meetings. In several instances, documents are also requested via Speed Post, which may not be possible due to travel restrictions.

Third, as a result of travel restrictions, Covid-19 distancing and other hardships to livelihoods during the lockdown, it is difficult to implement the ministry’s own mandated procedures in the foreseeable future. 

“In view of the compelling facts and circumstances outlined above, we request that implementation of decisions taken by the NBWL via videoconferencing be held in abeyance until pandemic-related travel restrictions are lifted to allow in-person meetings and travel to project sites for fresh appraisals following due process,” said the experts.

“We further urge that all meetings of NBWL, Forest Advisory Committee (FAC) and all the 10 EACs be postponed as long as travel restrictions make verification of documents during in-person meetings, local representations, and site visits difficult,” they added.


