With check-up & medicines, this doc helps many fight lockdown blues
2020-04-01
PUNE: For the past few days, a modest multi-speciality hospital in Chikhali has been an oasis of hope in a city left feeling bleak by the novel coronavirus outbreak. 

Apart from providing free treatment and medication, general physician Jitendrasinh Rathod also feeds about 1,000 daily wage workers, women and children from the area.

Rathod’s 20-bed facility is located at Sane Chowk. “I have been running the multi-speciality facility for a few years,” Rathod said. 

About three-four months ago, he established the Rathod Foundation for social work. “Under the foundation’s banner, I had started medical check-up for daily wagers in the initial stages of the coronavirus outbreak,” Rathod said. 

During these check-ups, Rathod noticed that the workers were struggling to find food, and started providing packaged food — mostly rice khichadi. 

Rathod recalled how, at first, some workers with major health complaints got really worried — this was before the lockdown was enforced — and would come to him for check-ups. “They had some flu-like symptoms, but unrelated to Covid-19. With proper medication and care, they recovered,” Rathod said. 

As the service was free, word spread rapidly, and the other daily wagers from the vicinity rushed to Rathod’s facility for any health-related complaints. 

“Earlier, I would also go to their transit camps and distribute food, but I haven’t been able to do that since the lockdown came into effect. So we now distribute food directly from the hospital,” Rathod said. 

Soon, Rathod started getting phone calls from other people and volunteers’ organization, with requests for food. “We provide food to them too as per requirement.” he said.

The food is prepared in the hospital’s kitchen, and Rathod has been funding the entire initiative out of his own pocket. “My social foundation is in its nascency and has no outside funding. I have been spending from whatever income my hospital gets to help people out in this time of crisis,” Rathod said.


