With temples shut, virus affects Navratra celebration
2020-03-26
Jaipur: The 21-day lockdown imposed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi to check the spread of Covid-19 has hit Navratra celebrations which started from Wednesday. For the first time, all temples remained shut in the state during the festival forcing people to perform pujas within the confine of their homes. 

Shila Mata temple in Amber, Karni Mata temple Bikaner, Jwala Mata temple in Jobner and other famous temples of goddess Durga have been closed down for the safety of people. 

Priest of Shila Mata temple Banwari Sharma said the puja will be organised in the temple but people are not allowed inside. “It is in the interest of the people to avoid spreading the disease. Priests of the temple will follow all the rituals while maintaining distance in the temple itself but the public will not be allowed. In my knowledge, I have never seen the spread of such a deadly disease,” said Banwari. 

People are trying to keep the festival low-key this time. Nirmala Sharma, a resident of Raja Park said, this is the first time she is staying indoors during Navratra. “Temples are shut so it will be better for everyone to celebrate at home. We have decorated a small temple at home for the goddess. This is safe and secure,” said Nirmala. 

Unlike last year, when shops were all decked up with pooja items, people are preferring hand-stitched clothes for the goddess this year. “I had purchased the pooja items in advance. But many are now stitching dresses and chunari (stoll) for the goddess at home. In my colony, people are borrowing some items from the neighbours for pooja. This is a difficult time when we must co-operate,” said Varsha Mangani, a resident of Adarsh Nagar. 

There is a custom of serving food to nine girls on the day of Ashtami and the local festival of Gangaur is also to be celebrated on Friday. Due to social distancing, people have cancelled inviting girls for the feast. 

Mukesh Kothari of Chandpole said that till last year, young girls used to roam around the city and people would call them and serve them food. “Due to epidemic, a majority of the people have cancelled inviting them or they have decided to distribute food packets to the children, going door to door. On Gangaur, we are planning to distribute packets to 14 children and have started the preparations. Need to find a way out to celebrate without putting any life in danger,” said Mukesh.


