With 533 cases, north Karnataka accounts for 50% of state’s Covid-19 tally
2020-05-17
HUBBALLI: Even as the country readies to ease restrictions on movement further in Lockdown 4.0 and Karnataka looks to open up most of the state, the northern districts are grappling with a surge in Covid-19 infections, especially following the return of residents from other states. The 11 districts of North Karnataka account for 50% of the cases — 533 of 1,092 — reported as of Saturday, and authorities fear the curve is showing no sign of flattening anytime soon. 

Of the total number of cases reported from across the region, 250 have been reported in May, when the central and state governments relaxed curbs and allowed movement of goods and people. Belagavi, Davanagere, Kalaburagi, Bidar, Bagalkot and Vijayapura have borne the brunt of the spike in Covid-19 cases in the region. Davanagere, in fact, was classified a green-zone district at the beginning of the month. A fortnight later, it has hurtled into the red zone.

The number of infected has also been steadily rising in Dharwad, Haveri, Yadgir and Gadag districts, which had very few or no cases till last week. Among the districts in North Karnataka, Belagavi is the worst-hit by coronavirus, with 114 cases. It is followed by Kalaburagi, with 94 cases, and Davanagere with 89. The good news, however, is that nearly 40% of the patients (205) have been treated successfully and discharged. 

Senior bureaucrats in the region attributed the spurt to the easing of the lockdown, and influx of residents who were stuck in other states. Most of the people who have tested positive in the region had travelled to Ahmedabad, Mumbai or Ajmer. The other common factor, official said, was that the returnees were asymptomatic on arrival in their home districts; tests confirmed that they were infected. 

In Belagavi, a majority of the patients are linked to the Tablighi Jamaat congreation in Delhi — either attendees or their contacts. In Davanagere, a nurse at a primary health centre and a 69-year-old man, who subsequently succumbed to the infection, accounted for most infections among contacts. 

Davanagere deputy commissioner Mahantesh Bilagi said the district administration has stepped up measures to contain the infection. “As many as eight localities in Davanagere city have been completely sealed, and declared containment zones. All people entering the district are being subjected to tests and are being quarantined in accordance with the norms,” Bilagi said. 

- (
With inputs from S A Gangaraju)


