With 24 fresh cases, Saharanpur’s count of Covid-19 patients jumps to 56
2020-04-14
Meerut: As many as 24 fresh cases surfaced in Saharanpur on Monday pushing the district’s tally of Covid-19 positive patients to 56 in one go. Meanwhile, Baghpat also recorded seven fresh cases taking the district’s tally to 14. Neighbouring Meerut, Bijnor and Hapur districts added three more positive cases each in their kitty. While Shamli also added three fresh cases and the total number of positive cases are 17 now. Bulandshahr has two more positive cases while Muzaffarnagar got one. Amroha got two more positive cases taking the district’s tally to nine.

With these fresh cases, Meerut has a total of 59 novel coronavirus patients in the district. Saharanpur has 56 and Bijnor has 4.

While Muzaffarnagar has seven positive patients, Hapur has nine and Bulandshahr 13.

Dr Raj Kumar, Meerut’s chief medical officer (CMO), said, “As many as three cases tested positive for coronavirus on Monday. While one is a Jharkhand resident who was quarantined at Subharti Medical College, two others were traced from Purva Faiyaz Ali area in Meerut and are contacts of Jamaatis.”

Meanwhile, 36 out of the total 166 Covid-19 suspects, who were quarantined at Subharti Medical College, were discharged on Monday after they completed their 14-day quarantine period and tested negative.

Dr BS Sodhi, Saharanpur CMO, said, “According to the reports received from Lucknow, 24 new cases have reported positive. All are Jamaatis. Contact tracing of the said people is being done and their treatment is on. Apart from these 24, another case tested positive, but it was repeat testing so it is not added to the total count.”

With the fresh 24 cases, the total tally of Saharanpur reached 56, including 12 who are admitted in Lucknow.

Dr KN Tiwari, Bulandshahr CMO, said, “The wife and son of the doctor who died of Covid-19 in Delhi, have tested positive and continue to remain under quarantine in Delhi. With the two new cases, the tally of the district has reached 13, out of which one has died.”

Dr Vijay Kumar Yadav, Bijnor CMO, said, “A 32-year-old Seohara resident from Bijnor has tested positive here. Meanwhile, samples of two suspected cases have been sent for retesting. He is quarantined in Haldaur and is being treated.” With this, Bijnor’s tally became five.

Amit Singh, additional district magistrate (enforcement), Muzaffarnagar, said, “One person has tested positive for coronavirus on Monday, taking the total tally to seven. He is a Jamaat member and was traced from Kidwai Nagar. Sanitisation and contact tracing has been launched in the area.”

With an additional case, Muzaffarnagar district tally became seven here.

Hapur district magistrate Aditi Singh, said, “Out of the total 103 test reports received, three persons have tested positive, taking total to nine in the district. Dotai, Sherpur and Kurana villages are being sealed. All of them are Jamaat members.”


