With 8 Covid-19 cases, Agra hoteliers, businessmen say virus will surely bankrupt them, if not kill
2020-03-14
AGRA: With markets crashing across the globe and countries imposing travel restrictions due to the coronavirus pandemic, hoteliers and industrials in the Taj city are witnessing a huge decline in business. Some of them fear the virus may not kill them but would surely bankrupt them if the downward trend continues for a few more weeks. The impact of the slowdown may even hit employees as both hoteliers and industrialists are looking at ways and means to cut their expenses, including retrenchments.


Of the total 12 Covid-19 positive cases in Uttar Pradesh, Agra alone has reported eight, making it one of the deadliest cities in the country. 

Hotels in Agra wore a deserted look with cancellations rising to nearly 50%. Besides, shoe exporters, some of whom tested positive for Covid-19 following their visit to a recent leather trade fair in Italy, are looking at cancellation of orders with several countries closing their borders.

Tourism Guild of Agra vice-president Rajiv Saxena said that the industry is “witnessing nearly 40-50% cancellations and this is only going to increase further as more restrictions are announced by governments across the globe”. With markets crashing and tourists demanding refunds, it is a double whammy for the tourism industry, he said.

Agra’s Jaypee Palace Hotel vice-president Hari Sukumar said, “Due to continued visa restrictions and travel ban, we are looking at an early onset of the sluggish summer season here as far as travel and tourism is concerned.” He added that even domestic tourists are scared to travel due to coronavirus scare. “Tough days are ahead. I hope that the climate will bring things back to normal and we can all get back to being busy again,” he said. 

The hotel alone received requests for cancellation of bookings for 800 rooms in a week.

Clarks Shiraz chief operating officer Debashish Bhowmik agreed that it’s a bad time for hoteliers. “Every year, around 600 rooms are booked by Chinese tourists after the Chinese new year starts. This year, it started on January 25 and not a single room was booked by them due to Covid-19. Besides, domestic tourists stopped travelling too due to panic across the nation. We have estimated a 50-60% drop in the business in the next two months as compared to last year,” Bhowmik said, adding that he has seen 30% loss in the business since January. 

Agra Footwear Manufacturers and Exporters Chamber (AFMEC) president Puran Davar said visa restrictions, uncertainty and panic across the world will “impact the shoe industry hugely as our main buyers are mainly from Central Europe including Italy, Germany and France”.

Shoe exporter Gopal Goyal said, “The entire leather industry has been badly hit by the coronavirus. Import of footwear components from China has completely stopped since January. Now, the supply of components from Italy and Spain are not possible. We are running out of stocks. Soon, it will start affecting manufacturing of finished footwear.”

Industry sources say raw material worth Rs 15 crore for manufacturing finished footwear is imported from different parts of China to Agra every month, which has completely stopped. 

AFMEC vice-president Rajesh Sehgal said he fears 50% drop in the export business. “Probably, many of us would end up being bankrupt if the situation continues like this for next few weeks and our orders are cancelled,” he added.

Agra had exported footwear worth Rs 4,000 crore in the last financial year. Out of these, around Rs 3000 crore exports were to the European countries and remaining to the US and several African countries. According to AFMEC, Agra has around 10,000 micro-size units, 30 medium-scale units and around 15 large-scale units. On an average, more than two lakh pairs of shoes are manufactured in the city every day and there are over 3.5 lakh people employed in the footwear segment in Agra.

