With 4 more Covid deaths in Akola, Vid cases surge to 554
2020-05-08
Nagpur: After recording highest single day spurt in Covid-19 cases on Wednesday, Vidarbha recorded highest single-day deaths on Thursday. Four deaths were reported in Akola, highest for a city in one day as well. Officials from Akola informed all four were men living within the Akola municipal corporation limits. 

“Two of them were brought to Akola GMCH in a critical condition on Wednesday and died immediately afterwards. Their swab samples were taken on Wednesday and came positive today. Other two were the patients admitted in isolation ward. They died during treatment,” said resident deputy collector of Akola Sanjay Khadse. 

After 68 cases on Wednesday, Nagpur continued to record new positive cases on Thursday too. Total of 38 new cases were reported throughout the day. Of these, three were the patients of Severe Acute Respiratory syndrome (SARI). As per the ICMR guidelines, all patients having SARI are tested for Covid-19. For the first time, three such cases tested positive. 

Amravati reported six new positive cases to take its count to 76 on Thursday. This took the count of active Covid-19 cases to 59 in the 60-bedded Covid hospital in city. New cases are from Taj Nagar and Maulana Azad Colony. Taj Nagar accounted for five of the six cases, thereby taking its tally to 13 (including one death), the highest from any single locality. Maulana Azad Colony, which reported death of a 70-year-old woman two days ago, posted its second case today. Seven of the active positive cases at Covid hospital are on way to recovery as their first swab test after treatment has come negative.

Yavatmal recorded no new positive patient on Thursday. The total active Covid-19 cases in isolation ward of Yavatmal GMCH are 82 now. In the last 24 hours, only two new admissions are reported there. 145 swab samples were sent to Nagpur on Thursday.

On Wednesday, a 50-year-old man had tested positive from Ner town, 30 km from Yavatmal. He is a teacher who was infected from the earlier positive patients from single source who had visited Ner during religious tour.

QUARANTINED PERSON BOOKED: Raju Datta Rakade, a resident of village Hivra under Mahagaon police station and a labourer kept in quarantine, was booked for violating it. He had returned to his village on May 6 and the Disaster Management Committee had quarantined him. Since he has no house of his own, they arranged his stay in local primary school. However, he started moving freely in the village and mixing with other people. The Disaster Management Committee chairman MI Sheikh, police patil Pravin Kadam and village development officer VD Sawalkar jointly lodged a complaint in Mahagaon police station against Raju on Thursday. 

Chandrapur recorded no new case on Thursday. Gadchandur police detained three people from Manikgarh cement factory premises suspecting them to be three positive patients who had fled from Nanded. Cops later stated that names given by them do not match those of Nanded patients. Still as a precautionary measure a medical team with cops from Nanded came to Gadchandur and took the three with them to Nanded for identification and medical examination.


