With death in Amravati,Covid-19 toll in Vidarbha is 50
2020-05-24
NAGPUR: Amravati crossed the 150 mark in Covid-19 positive cases and recorded the 15th death on Saturday. Two deceased from rural Buldhana whose samples were collected after their death also tested positive, taking the death toll in Vidarbha to 50. 

The virus is spreading aggressively in Vidarbha, especially in rural areas. On Saturday, nine out of the region’s 11 districts recorded 52 positive cases. Most of them are from rural areas and returnees from hotspots. 

Akola continued to record the highest number of cases in Vidarbha for the third day in a row. In all, 23 cases were reported in Akola on Saturday. On the same day, eight women were discharged. The city now has 378 cases, including 219 recoveries and 23 deaths. Neighbouring district Buldhana recorded two deaths. The two deceased were from rural Buldhana, including a 77-yr-old woman who tested positive. Buldhana now has 3 deaths and 36 cases. The recovery rate of Buldhana is also good. So far, 25 patients have recovered here. On Saturday, an 8-year-old girl recovered and was discharged from the District Hospital.

Amravati recorded a death for the second day in succession on Saturday. According to an official release, a 56-year-old woman of Al Hilal colony, who was the first to test positive from her colony on May 21 and was undergoing treatment at the covid hospital, died late Friday night. Her death is the seventh at the covid hospital here.

The city also saw seven new positive cases from different localities on Saturday, taking the count of the district to 152. The list includes 15 deaths, 58 active cases, two referred to GMCH, Nagpur, and 76 recovered.

Chandrapur also recorded three new positive cases on Saturday. The patients include a Mumbai-returnee nurse, another person who came from Dharavi and a 16-year-old girl, a contact of a person who had come to Vriva village in Sidewahi tehsil. The number of positive patients in Chandrapur is now 15. 

Civil Surgeon Dr ND Rathod said that a nurse working with a private institute in Mumbai came back to her house in Babupeth here on May 16. She had served 22 days of institutional quarantine in Mumbai at a private hotel before leaving for Chandrapur. Soon after arrival, she went into home quarantine. However, as she started developing symptoms of the virus, she went to GMCH and got herself admitted on May 20. Her sample was taken on May 21 and her positive report came late on Friday night. Her three family members have been put in institutional quarantine and their samples have been collected for testing.

A 37-year-old man who came to Ballarpur from Dharavi, Mumbai, on May 20. He was immediately put in institutional quarantine. His swab sample, which was sent on Friday, tested positive on Saturday. Another 16-year-old girl, a contact of a person who had travelled from Malegaon MIDC to village Virva in Sindewahi tehsil, tested positive on Saturday evening. She has also been put in institutional quarantine. 

In Wardha, a new patient was registered for the second day in a row on Saturday. As a result, the number of cases in the district has increased to 12, including 9 from different districts, informed civil surgeon, Dr Purushottam Madavi.

Two days ago, a 25-year-old youth came from Mumbai to Rohana village in Arvi Tahsil. He was working for a housekeeping company in Mumbai. He tested positive on Saturday. The youth had complained of fever and cold on May 21. He was admitted to the sub-district hospital, Arvi. His swab sample was sent to MGIMS for testing on the same day. After his positive report on Saturday, he was shifted to Kasturba Hospital, Sewagram.

In Yavatmal, the graph of positive cases is rising. It’s a cause for concern. On Saturday, one person from Kalamb, who returned from Pune, tested positive which makes the total 17. Two persons were admitted in the isolation ward. There are 22 patients in the isolation ward of which 17 are positive. Seven test reports are awaited. So far, 113 tested positive of which 96 have recovered and discharged for home quarantine. Around 15 are in institutional quarantine while 486 are in home quarantine.

In Gondia, 7 more labourers coming from Mumbai tested positive. A couple returning from Pune tested positive in Bhandara. Except Gadchiroli and Washim, all districts in Vidarbha reported positive cases on Saturday.


