Woes pile up for Guntur as district sees upswing in Covid-19 numbers
2020-06-04
Guntur: Fourteen Covid-19 cases were reported from Guntur district on Wednesday. This includes five students who returned from Indonesia, two from Chennai and one each from Pune and Hyderabad.

The district administration has a daunting task on its hands with people returning from other cities and then travelling on to their native villages in green zones after giving samples.

Meanwhile, merchants and shop owners are in a dilemma whether to keep their establishments open for additional working hours and receive more customers or continue the lockdown for a few more days.

There has been a spurt in Covid-19 cases after the district administration announced several relaxations for merchants and reduced the number of containment zones in line with the Centre’s directives. 

The administration has also decided to mark off entire areas as containment zones only if the number of cases is more than 10. In other instances, the containment zone will be confined to a circumference of 200 meters from the location of the patient.

In the last three days, more than 10 positive cases per day have been reported in the district. A vendor at a wholesale vegetable market located on the outskirts of Guntur city has become a super-spreader with 25 people contracting the virus from him.

With these 25 people living in different areas of the city, the administration has a tough job to trace the primary and secondary contacts. According to sources, around 1,200 people were identified as close contacts and have been taken to different quarantine facilities.

The officials fear that the district might face more cases if the trend continues at the same pace. Rural reas of the district, which so far had reported few positive cases, may soon no longer enjoy their green zone status following the relaxation of restrictions on travel. 

Officials said if the number of cases continues to increase, test results of between six to eight per cent of contacts of infected persons are likely to return positive within the next couple of days.


