Woman with diabetes, high BP defeats Covid-19, son too recovers
2020-04-06
RAJKOT: When Vimla Kanabar and her son Kaushal walked out of the Rajkot Civil Hospital’s isolation ward, the entire staff including doctors gave them a rousing applause. 

The hospital staff was more relief for Vimla, the 75-year-old woman, who bravely fought coronavirus infection despite having other co-morbid conditions like diabetes and hypertension for many years now. 

It must be noted that all the 11 Covid-19 patients who succumbed to the infection in Gujarat had co-morbid conditions, which resulted in deterioration of their health and ultimately death.

“We were so happy to breathe fresh air on coming out,” Vimla and Kaushal said after walking out. Kaushal , who runs a showroom of ethnic wears on Yagnik Road, remained in the hospital for 11 days, two days more than his mother.

“I was scared when I tested positive. But the only weapon I had to fight back this situation was my immense faith in God and the doctors who took care of me day and night,” said Vimla.

Talking to TOI, 42-year-old Kaushal said: “I have never been admitted to any hospital in my life, so I was obviously very frightened on the first day. There was complete uncertainty and the atmosphere inside scared me even more.”

“But as my treatment progressed, I started gaining confidence that I would recover. I started figuring out from the body language of doctors and nurses that my body was responding to the medicines. I was also worried for my mother. But now I am happy that we both have recovered,” he added.

Kaushal and his mother have a message for those who test positive. “We want to tell all those who are under treatment to have courage. If you are mentally strong, your recovery gets faster and surer. Don’t panic and maintain social distancing and the guidelines issued by the government.” 

The mother-son duo can’t thank the civil hospital doctors and staff enough for the kind of treatment they had received.

Vimla wanted to stay back and serve patients


