Woman held for terror plot tests positive for Covid-19 in Delhi
2020-06-08
NEW DELHI: A Kashmiri woman, who was arrested in an alleged terror case filed by National Investigation Agency, tested positive for novel coronavirus while in the custody, a city court was informed on Sunday.


While directing NIA to admit Hina Bashir Beigh to Lok Nayak Hospital, the court sent her husband, Jahanzaib Sami, and another accused Abdul Basith to judicial custody.

Beigh’s counsel M S Khan sought interim bail for two months, arguing that the capital was struggling to deal with the rising number of Covid-19 positive cases. “Delhi is struggling to cope with the rising number of positive cases of Covid-19, and due to the lack of proper treatment facilities in government hospitals, which has also been highlighted in the media, Delhi government has been compelled to issue a list of 56 private hospitals for Covid treatment,” the bail plea stated.

According to NIA, the accused were arrested for allegedly promoting Islamic State’s ideology and instigating protests against Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

Tests of accused persons were conducted on June 6 on the directions of the court, while their 10-day custodial interrogation ended on Sunday. Following the tests, Beigh was found positive, NIA said.

The three accused, allegedly having links with Islamic State Khorasan Province (ISKP), were arrested by Special Cell of Delhi Police on March 8. Basith was already lodged in jail in another case being probed by NIA when Delhi Police arrested him in the present matter.

NIA took over the probe and registered it under sections 120-B (criminal conspiracy), 124-A (sedition) and 153-A (provocation for causing riot) of the IPC and sections 13 (punishment for unlawful activities) and 20 (being member of terrorist gang or organisation) of the stringent Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act.

Earlier, Pramod Kushwaha, DCP (Special Cell), had claimed: “They are members of the banned terrorist outfit, ISIS, and propagating its ideology of hatred. They are also inciting Muslims to take up violent struggle against the state.”

