Woman from hotspot & her newborn beat Covid-19 in Pune
2020-06-13
PUNE: A 28-year-old woman and her infant who had tested positive for Covid-19 have recovered after 12 days of treatment at Yashwantrao Chavan Memorial Hospital (YCMH) in Pimpri.

The woman, a resident of a containment zone in Pimpri, was suspected to be infected before she was admitted for delivery at DY Patil Hospital on May 31. She was asymptomatic and hence no test was carried out. 

“She delivered a baby boy on June 1 and the same day she started facing breathing problems and had a fever and a cough. The woman and the infant were sent to our hospital. On June 2, we collected their swab samples and the reports were positive the following day. The infant was infected by the mother as they were in close contact for at least 48 hours,” Deepali Ambike, head of paediatric department of YCMH, said. 

The baby was admitted in the NICU while the mother was kept in the women’s ward. A dedicated team of junior doctors and a nurse took care of the baby who had breathing trouble. 

“We gave oxygen and anti-viral treatment which stabilised him after 48 hours. The mother’s condition was not good. She was suffering from respiratory problems and fever. The condition of both patients improved on the third and fourth day.” 

The doctor said the baby was on power milk till then before being breastfed. Thereafter, the mother and baby were in the same ward where they recovered fully. They were discharged on Friday. 

Meanwhile, six doctors involved in the woman’s delivery procedure at the D Y Patil Medical College and Hospital have been quarantined.

A senior paediatrician at the hospital said, “The woman and her relatives hid the fact that she is the resident of a containment zone. We have quarantined our gynaecologist, anaesthetist, and four other resident doctors after she tested positive for Covid-19.”

Despite repeated attempts, the hospital’s dean J S Bhawalkar could not be reached for his comment.

The woman and her husband are labourers and could not travel to their native place in Uttar Pradesh, an official from Pimpri Chinchwad civic health department said. 


