Woman who returned from Italy tests negative for Covid-19 in Kheri
2020-03-17
BAREILLY: District health administration in Lakhimpur Kheri heaved a sigh of relief after the sample of a 25-year-old woman who recently returned from Italy tested negative for COVID-19. The woman was admitted to the isolation ward and kept in quarantine even as the health department tracked and monitored the people who came in contact with her after she returned to India.


To check the novel coronavirus from spreading, all malls and cinema halls have been closed in Kheri district to prevent large gatherings of people.

As the district shares its border with Nepal, the entry of residents of countries other than Nepal has also been banned. 

A round-the-clock control room has been set up at the DM’s residence in Lakhimpur city. Residents have been advised not to panic and can seek help or advice regarding COVID-19 on a helpline 05872-252715 / 252879

CMO of Kheri, Dr Manoj Agarwal, said, “We have received a list of 15 people who recently returned from abroad and five of them are being kept in isolation. Their samples have been sent for coronavirus test. We were mainly worried about the woman who recently returned from Italy soon after the coronavirus outbreak in that country. She had stayed in Italy for a brief period and, fortunately, her sample tested negative. She can be discharged now. We are working to make the masses aware about the preventive measures they need to take to ensure coronavirus doesn’t spread here. Every person entering through Nepal border is also being scanned by our health officials.”

On Monday, a meeting was also held between officials from India and Nepal in Palia town. Kheri’s DM Shailendra Kumar Singh and chief development officer, Kailali (Nepal), Yagya Raj discussed about preventive measures being taken by both countries. Nepalese officials said they had already installed thermal scanning machine in Nepal to screen everyone entering or leaving the country.

Later, DM Shailendra Kumar Singh along with CMO Manoj Agarwal paid a surprise visit to the Indian health camp at Gaurifanta border and inspected it. They were also shown the precautions being taken by Nepal in their health camp at Trinagar entry point.


