Woman, 47, helping her village cope with Covid-19 after making it ODF
2020-04-10
Bijnor: At 47, Jarifan has another task cut out for her, and she is restless as ever. In the next few days, she will ensure that every person in her Mauzampur Tulsi village wears a mask, and follows the physical distancing. She is stitching and distributing them for free. And, over 500 families of the Bijnor village will “fall in line”, as they did earlier on several occasions.Jarifan was felicitated in 2016 by the then President Pranab Mukherjee for playing an active role in government’s campaign against open defecation. “Due to her efforts, at least 200 houses built toilets. The village is now free from open defecation,” says a senior government officer.District coordinator of National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM) Gyan Singh says, “Jarifan is a gritty woman who faced several odds in her life. She now runs her own self-help group in which several women have got employment. She is working as senior community resource person and is associated with our scheme. She was felicitated by President and UP chief minister Yogi Adityanath for her work.”“The odds were surmountable,” says Jarifan, while pausing to instruct a manual worker to clean the filth lying on the road in the minority-dominated village, about 40-km from district headquarters of Bijnor. Married at an early age, Jarifan had seven children to raise by the time she reached 31.“Suddenly, one day, my husband fell ill and became bed-ridden. I consulted several doctors, but he couldn’t stand at all. I was illiterate and didn’t know what to do then,” Jarifan said while recalling the past. “I knew cooking though,” she said. So Jarifan eventually landed a cook’s job in a government primary school.Apart from cooking the mid-day meal, Jarifan also helped the school enrol at least 50 students from the village.She was getting Rs 500 per month as cook, which was not enough to sustain such a large family.“I also started attending panchayat meetings to know about the government schemes,” she said. It was there she got the idea of self-help group. In the meantime, she also joined evening classes at adult education programme, and in 2015, cleared Class VIII exams at the age of 42.Now, she runs a self-help group of ten women. Apart from running the group, she also rents out subsidized agriculture equipment to farmers. Yogendra Pal Singh Yogi, deputy project officer of Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) scheme said, “Jarifan has taken some subsidized agriculture equipment under central sponsored scheme. She gives them on rent to farmers. She is running her group with honestly.” Jarifan, now 47, says, “My four children are married now. Rest are still in school.” Now, she is busy spreading information about Covid-19 in the village. “I am going door-to-door and sensitizing women and children that they should stay at home to save their lives. They should offer namaz at home and maintain social distancing.” So far, she had distributed over 300 masks and more are being stitched by her group.