Woman cop from Kanpur succumbs to Covid-19 in Agra; death toll mounts to 18
2020-05-07
AGRA: Just three days after giving birth to a girl, a woman constable from Kanpur succumbed to Covid-19 in Agra on Wednesday. The woman, 27, was posted in Bilhaur police station of Kanpur district. On April 1, she had come to her in-law’s home in Ishwar Nagar area of Agra on a maternity leave.

After her delivery at Lady Lyall Hospital on May 2, she was discharged. But her sample was collected for the Covid-19 test.

On Wednesday morning, her condition deteriorated as she was unable to breathe properly and was having cold and fever. The family took her to a private hospital but she was not given admission there. Later, at 12:30pm, she breathed her last.

Hours later, the health department alerted the family that her test result has been found Covid-19 positive. After which her husband, who works in private finance company, left the victim’s body in their car and waited for health department team to arrive.

A health department team took away her body. While her husband, the newly-born girl and mother-in-law were quarantined and their samples were collected. The sanitisation of the residential area too was kick-started.

Arvind Kumar, SHO of Sikandra, said, “The woman's husband informed about her death to police. The health department is now doing its work.”

On May 2, the victim's father-in-law, Randhir Singh, had succumbed in Delhi due to liver ailment. However, his sample was tested negative.

Meanwhile, the district administration confirmed that 57-year-old constable, who succumbed in SN medical College on May 1, was tested positive.

Identified as Satish Chandra, the deceased policeman’s family would be paid Rs 50lakh compensation by state government, as he was posted in Covid-19 duty. According to sources, till Wednesday, 48 UP policemen were tested positive, out of which two succumbed in Agra.

In Agra, the total Covid-19 death tally has now risen to 18 and with 655 positives.

Meanwhile, an inmate of the Central Jail in Agra was tested positive for Covid-19. After the revelation, at least 12 inmates’ samples were collected, as they came in the contact of positive patient.


