Woman under quarantine in Kargil moved to hospital, delivers baby boy
2020-04-01
NEW DELHI: A 30-year-old woman, who was quarantined in Kargil near the Line of Control after one of her family members tested positive for Covid-19, has given birth to a bonny baby at a government district hospital. But the family reunion and celebrations will have to wait for a while since her kin, including her husband, continue to remain in quarantine. The father hasn’t been able to see the baby till now.


Zahra Banoo gave birth to a boy on March 28, in what is possibly the first known case of “quarantine birth” in India. Zohra Banoo, the gynaecologist who attended to the mother, said the newborn weighs a healthy 3.5 kg and has been vaccinated.

Two days before her due date, Zahra was shifted to the hospital from a quarantine facility in Kurbathang in an ambulance. “We shifted the mother to the out-patient department and utmost care was taken to ensure she didn’t come in contact with other patients,” said Dr Kachoo Sikandar Ali Khan, medical superintendent at the district hospital in Kargil. There are 353 people in quarantine in the district, Kargil DC Baseer Khan said.

Zahra has tested negative for the coronavirus twice but those attending to the woman wore protective gear as an added precaution. By Tuesday, she had served 14 days of her quarantine and doctors said she would be released soon.

Khan added that the delivery had brought much cheer among the hospital staff. “In these times of crisis, our staff volunteered to provide emotional support to the pregnant woman as she was alone,” said a doctor, citing the example of one Fatima, employed as sanitation staff at the hospital, who stayed with the mother during labour.

At the quarantine facility, the father said he was happy and anxious at the same time. “This is my third child and I wish I could have been there with them,” said Vilayat Ali. “I’m grateful that the doctors supported us. We were shifted from Sankoo (a town 45km from Kargil) to the quarantine facility after my brother who had no travel history tested positive. It’s a tough region to travel with heavy snow on roads but we are glad the ambulance made that journey to bring us under medical supervision.”

The parents don’t have a name for their child yet. “We’ll decide once our family is back together,” said Ali.

