Women play key role in fight against Covid-19
2020-06-02
PATNA: From frontline health workers, to caregivers in the family, women have played an important role in this Covid-19 pandemic. 

At the forefront of battling the pandemic are ANMs, anganwadi and Asha (Accredited Social Health Activists) workers. As part of corona warriors, they move around in the field risking their lives visiting households both in urban and rural areas carrying out health checks. They are also tasked with tasked with alerting authorities about suspected cases and assisting the police in ensuring that all home-quarantined persons do not come out of their homes. 

Sociologist Archana Rai Bhatt, who is also the secretary of Mahila Kalyan Samaiti said, “Women have swung into action and actively joined the battle against Covid-19. Right from providing health services, sanitation, working as house helps or being a part of police and administration, they are constantly on the move. Those staying at home should now realise that how women risk their family and their own lives while on duty. Even the housewives are on their toes 24x7 as most of the family members stay home.” 

Bihar Mahila Samaj working president Nivedita Jha said, “Be it an anganwadi or Asha worker, a Jeevika member or an ANM, women have contributed more than ever before in this Covid-19 pandemic. They are now going door-to -door, recording people’s travel history, noting symptoms and, where needed, even helping trace contacts.”

“Though people have stated realising the contribution of women in this pandemic, male chauvinism still exists. We cannot ignore that cases of domestic violence have increased in this lockdown,” she added. 

“I have been counselling people in my area about social distancing and symptoms of coronavirus. Babies are still being born, pregnant women still need regular health check-ups, and new mothers need to be supported with breastfeeding and feeding young children. Hence, I also have to make sure pregnant women get their medicines and other care,” said an ANM Seema.

Indrapuri resident Simmi Parveen said after seeing her working tirelessly, her kids and husband have now started helping her in day-to-day work. “They used to see me busy throughout the day. They have realised how difficult it is to manage a house and now they are also contributing their lot,” she said.


