Jaipur women firefighters who are taking on coronavirus
2020-03-29
JAIPUR: Basant Kanwar’s day begins much before dawn as she has to report for duty at 7am. Before leaving her house at 6.15am, this 31-year-old firefighter not only takes care of the daily chores, but also prepares meals for her family members who are yet to wake up.

That is just the beginning of the day and tougher tasks await. Basant is one of the six women fire officers of Jaipur Municipal Corporation’s fire brigade who are sent out to disinfect the city. Not an easy job not because of the health hazards, but the fact that people do not trust them to do such a job well.

“It is not easy to fight the patriarchal mindset of people. When we go for disinfecting work or even on a fire call, some people mock us. Initially, they doubt our capability. But after they see us work, people clap and cheer for us. Elders give us their blessings it gives me joy, pride and immense satisfaction,” says Basant Kanwar.

A mother of two children - aged four and one - Basant says she is extra careful about sanitising herself on reaching home. “My shift ends at 3pm and on reaching home, I take a bath and properly wash my uniform daily and only then touch my children and get started with daily chores. My in-laws are also elderly so precautions are a must,” she adds.

While her family supports her, she admits that her neighbours are a bit sceptical about her current duty. “I don’t care. They need to realise that somebody will have to do this. Spraying disinfectants is necessary,” she says.

Another fire officer Sushila Kumari (28) posted at Bindayaka fire station said her family including her in-laws are really proud of her. “I got married at the age of 20 and it was the support of my husband that I am here. They want me to serve in the time of crisis. It is discouraging when we are laughed on field by people. But I keep doing my work and also ask people to stay inside.”

Currently, there are 50 women fire officer in Jaipur out which 20 have been deployed in spraying disinfectants. There are other women officers who are currently posted in the control rooms. From 8am to 7 pm, these women fire fighters play their role in trying to keep the city safe.

People do appreciate their work but in the time of pandemic, families worry as well.

Sita Khatik, working in control room says, “I have to keep a watch on the vehicles operating in the field. Give them instructions based on the inputs from JMC about the next place they should visit. It is a 12-hour job in the time of emergency. My husband and family members are worried and have asked me apply for leave. But how can I do that? Citizens trust us to do out jobs and we can’t break that trust.”

“I am getting calls from my family members everyday asking me to stay inside,” said Raju Budadak, a 27-year-old fire officer posted at Jhotwara fire station. “They are worried as we are on field. But this is my job. If an army official can fight on the battle field leaving behind his family, why can’t I do that. Duty is always our priority,” said Raju. 

Authorities have provided them with gloves, masks and goggles especially for disinfectant work. While spraying, the officers cover their face and body completely as any drop of disinfectant leaves irritation on skin. One of the officers, on condition of anonymity, admitted that the disinfectants often cause headaches and burning in the eyes. 

“We do not have body suits but that does not deter us,” said one.

