Women lead Odisha’s fight against coronavirus
2020-04-12
BHUBANESWAR: Women have taken the lead in the fight against Covid-19 in the state. The leadership and perseverance showcased by women, not just those in key administrative positions but at the grassroots, have helped Odisha keep its patient count to a relatively low 50. From contact tracing to collecting samples, from testing potential infection carriers to buying protective gear and ensuring availability of food, essential items and masks, these women are working shoulder to shoulder with their male counterparts.


Take for instance the three big testing facilities in the state — AIIMS and the Regional Medical Research Centre (RMRC) in Bhubaneswar and SCB Medical College and Hospital in Cuttack. All are headed by women. Then there is Shalini Pandit, mission director of National Health Mission, Yamini Sarangi, managing director of Odisha State Medical Corporation Limited, and Sujata Karthikeyan, director of Mission Shakti, all of who are leading from the front.

AIIMS director Gitanjali Batmanabane said she was free to focus on her work simply because her mother was managing the home front. “We are constantly on call, even at night. We have to be alert 24X7. Coronavirus has taken over everything,” she added.

The RMRC, the wing of the Indian Medical Research Council in Bhubaneswar that has taken the lead role in testing for Covid-19, is not only headed by a woman, the majority of its members are also women. “Our virus research and diagnostic laboratory is headed by Jyotirmayee Turuk, whose team of scientists and technicians comprises several hardworking women. Women have more perseverance and they do their work more meticulously,” said director of RMRC, Sanghamitra Pati.

Sanghamitra thanked both the male scientists at RMRC and the family members of the women staff for providing mental and physical support to them during this challenging time. “We are ensuring that our staff do not suffer a burnout because of the work pressure. The trust of the state and the confidence that the people have shown in us have given us the motivation we needed to do the work,” she added.

The head of the microbiology department of SCB Medical College and Hospital, Nirupama Chayani, said her priority right now was work and only work. “I am coming home for an hour every day only to eat. I think God has made women strong for such difficult times.”

Shalini, whose team is at the forefront of the battle, said, “Women have always handled the bulk of healthcare. There are many faceless workers, including women doctors, nurses screening Covid-19 patients and health workers (ANM, AWW, ASHA) going from house to house and checking the health of the people.”

MD of OSMCL, Yamini, said, “No doubt the time we are going through is very stressful, but I am not tired. My family is a big support for me. In terms of procurement of personal protective equipment (PPE), essential drugs, surgical equipment, the state is very well prepared. Besides, orders have been placed for 424 units of ICU ventilators.”

Not just women at the top, lakhs of women fighters across the state are working day in and day out to make people’s lives easier. Among them are over 70 lakh women of self-help groups. Mission Shakti director, Sujata, said, “They are our social capital. During any difficult time, our grass-root sheroes have always come forward and lent their support; be it in the form of creating awareness, making masks or providing cooked food to the poor.”

