Covid-19: Working to keep fatalities in Tamil Nadu down, says govt as 12 die in a day
2020-05-29
CHENNAI: Tamil Nadu recorded 12 deaths on Thursday, its highest single-day Covid-19 toll, and the number of fresh cases continued to rise with 827 reported — 117 of them migrants coming into the state by air and rail — taking the tally to 19,372. Chennai accounted for 599 of the fresh cases and its three neighbouring districts of Kancheepuram, Chengalpet and Tiruvallur reported 102. The state’s death toll was 145.


Health minister C Vijayabaskar urged people to wear masks and follow social distancing norms and to “not politicise” the pandemic. Doctors and nurses in government hospitals are working hard to keep recoveries high and mortality low. The state has a mortality rate of 0.7% and a recovery rate that was more than 50% after 639 patients discharged on Thursday took the number of people cured to 10,584.He said, “In this sweltering heat, with no air-conditioners in hospitals doctors and nurses don thick PPEs and work for six to seven hours straight without drinking water or using the restroom.”

The video of the wife of a police officer, who profusely thanked the doctors for saving her husband explains why the state has succeeded in keeping standards high, when some of developed countries like France and Italy are struggling with a fatality rate of 15% and 14% respectively, the minister said. “Doctors face a huge challenge when patients are referred in critical stage from a private hospital. These patients die with a few hours of admission when it is too late for any intervention,” he said. 

The state is ramping up human resources and medical infrastructure at hospitals to meet the surge predicted by scientists and public health researchers. The blood donated by some of the doctors who were infected after treating infected patients was used in the plasma therapy trial to treat seven patients at the Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital as a part of the ICMR’s clinical trail, he said. Hospital dean Dr R Jayanthi said the patients are responding well to the therapy. “We have also randomised patients for the Solidarity trial that is testing the broad spectrum antiviral Remdesivir,” she said.

So far, 936 passengers from Maharashtra, 27 from Gujarat, 26 from Karnataka, 19 from West Bengal, 17 from Delhi and 10 each from Kerala and Rajasthan have tested positive. 

Of the 12 deaths reported on Thursday, six patients died with 48 hours of admission. There youngest was a 36-year-old man and the oldest was a 78-year-old. At the end of the day, there were 8,676 patients still undergoing treatment. 


