Workers at quarantine facilities demand testing, protection
2020-04-07
Nagpur: With two positive cases emerging from those quarantined at Vanamati and MLA Hostel facilities, housekeeping and sanitary workers deployed at these and other place have demanded better protection. Sources said workers at Vanamati didn't report on duty on Sunday after they got the news. 

Now MLA Hostel workers too have said they should be tested and given protection kits or they wouldn’t work. The contractor too couldn’t assure continuation of service. 

M/s Kabir Bahuddeshiya Seva Sahkari Sanstha proprietor Vivek Jain said his workers at MLA Hostel and Ravi Bhavan were demanding they be tested for coronavirus as it was almost a month they had been dealing with suspect cases.

Since beginning, these workers have been exposed to the people as they have to clean their rooms and serve food thrice a day. Initially, there was lack of PPE too. The contractor had to arrange them on his own. 

The officials had told them there was no reason to worry as these were just passengers and not patients. The officials had given same statement to TOI too that no patient was kept at these places.

MLA hostel was filled up with people who were close contacts of positive patients in the city. Last week, people with travel history to Delhi were quarantined in large numbers. Of them, one tested positive on Saturday at Vanamati. Another housed at MLA hostel tested positive on Monday.

Sources said during this time the close contacts of positive patients from North, Central and South-West Nagpur allegedly created ruckus at MLA hostel under influence of liquor. 

This forced revenue officials and cops to start checking food and other parcels brought to all quarantine facilities by relatives and friends. The women workers had expressed inablity to work if these activities were not controlled.

PWD execeutive engineer Janardhan Bhanuse said, "Our workers had been due taking care. The contractor has requested for Covid-19 testing but it is for the health officials to decide. We are ready to pay for the test if needed. We have engaged workers who have hospital experience. They are provided with masks and kits, sanitizers while disinfectant is sprayed at work area. The doctors are also continuously monitoring the workers," he said. 

Bhanuse said all medical guidelines were being strictly followed. "Everybody is doing good work," he said. Jain said, "The agreement to cater to Covid-19 suspects would be signed soon with PWD. We have been told it will have insurance cover for workers," he said.


