Work to restore Puzhuthivakkam lake, stalled by Covid, resumes
2020-06-11
Chennai: Restoration of the Puzhuthivakkam lake, which was stalled due to the Covid-19 outbreak, has resumed. Corporation workers have begun installing bollards on the footpath and hand railings along the footpath surrounding the lake. 

According to an engineer from Perungudi (zone 14), apart from the Puzhuthivakkam lake, they will also begin work on Madipakkam lake, Naicker Kuttai in Madipakkam, Vembuli Amman Temple tank near Puzhuthivakkam, Naachangulam near Pallikaranai, Vannankuttai near Jalladanpet. 

Perungudi is one of the least affected zones with 450 Covid cases. 

“After repeated complaints from residents about people misusing the footpath along the Puzhuthivakkam lake, we have installed bollards. A portion of footpath is yet to be completed. That will also be finished,” said the engineer. With a budget of Rs 2.4 crore from the smart city project fund, corporation proposed to set up a walking track, fences, benches and create islands at the lake. They also planned to plant trees on the islands and grass on the bund. The project which began in November 2018, was to be completed in a year. But it has been delayed, said residents of Sheela Nagar, who maintain the saplings along the footpath. 

“The work started again in February and stairs and hand rails were installed. But the pandemic brought the work to a halt. People are using the footpath for morning and evening walks even now. It is good that work has resumed,” said S Ramakrishnan, a resident of Puzhuthivakkam. 

Reclaiming encroached spaces around the water body delayed the project, a corporation official said.

Residents have raised concerns about the place being used as an open-air bar and liquor bottles being dumped into the water body. Corporation officials said the premises will be fenced soon and that they are considering installing high mast lights along the footpath. 

About sewage being let into the lake, the engineer said all such connections were cut off before the restoration work began. “Further, in Ullagaram and Puzhuthivakkam, Metrowater has already started giving underground drainage connections,” said the official.


