Work to set up quarantine facility at Rajkoor suspended
2020-03-17
MADURAI: Residents of housing apartments built by Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board at Rajakoor in Madurai district held a road roko protest on Monday opposing the quarantine facility for normal passengers from Covid-19-affected countries that is to be set up there. Police and health officials held talks and have temporarily suspended work for the facility.


With Covid-19 quarantine facilities actively being set up across the state to isolate and monitor passengers from the seven Covid-19-affected countries specified by the government, one such centre was to be housed in some of the vacant cabins at the housing apartments in Rajakoor built by the TN Slum Clearance Board. However, as news of health officials inspecting the area for setting up of the facility spread, panicked locals opposed the plan and even submitted a petition to the collector. Though the work for the facility was assured to be suspended, health officials still visited the site on Monday prompting locals to protest.

At least a group of around 50 residents staged a protest disrupting traffic for some time. “We strongly oppose setting up this facility. It is a matter of life and death. What if we get infected by chance? That fear is always there. If it is so safe, then why can’t it be shifted anywhere else, even centre of the city,” said one of the protesters. The protesters also added that if the facility is set up for functioning, they would be forced to leave the area. Police and health officials later held talks assuring that they are suspending the work after which the crowd dispersed.

Meanwhile, health officials defended that all safety measures were to be put in place and that the people to be quarantined would not even have symptoms of Covid-19. They added that it is one among many spots in the district identified for a quarantine facility. “There is nothing to fear about quarantining. We tried our best to assure the locals of their safety but so far it was of no avail. The district collector will take the final decision,” said a health official.


