Coronavirus scare: Workers in Iran worried, call on Union government to airlift them back to India
2020-03-03
Hundreds of Indians working in Kish Island of Iran have set the alarm bells ringing by urging New Delhi to airlift them back to India as coronavirus is spreading on the island. 


The Indian nationals include workers from neighbouring Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Rajasthan. They said they were coming across reports of virus-related deaths going up. “Every day, we are hearing at least 10-15 fatalities on the island. We are stranded in camps and not being allowed to go out. We want to return to India,” the workers said in a video appeal to external affairs minister S Jaishankar.

They said since no flights were being operated, they cannot come back to India. Their company where they are working is also not taking interest to send them home. Anil Chauhan of Uttar Pradesh told TOI over phone from Kish Island that they work in with a construction firm. “We were first taken to Dubai as we were given to understand that we would be employed there. However, we were taken to Kish Island from there,” he said. The workers have been on the island for nearly six months now.

A Telugu worker Narasimha Reddy urged the government to help them come back to their native. Narasimha told TOI that the coronavirus scare was spreading fast in Iran. “We cannot even go to the hospital for a medical check-up. Flights to India and other countries have been cancelled,” he said. He works in Tehran. 

Jaishankar said he has been working on the issue of Indian workers stranded in Iran anxious to return. “Have seen many tweets in this regard. We are collaborating with the Iranian authorities to set up a screening process for return of Indians,” he tweeted. 

Indian ambassador to Iran Dhamu Gaddam said in view of Covid-19, they are working to facilitate the return of the Indians wishing to go back home. “Discussions are under way with the authorities to work out travel arrangements,” he said.


