World bodies issue guidelines for migrant workers to curtail spread of coronavirus
2020-05-14
KANPUR: The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), National Health Mission (NHM) and the World Health Organization (WHO) have issued guidelines for migrant workers, students and others who are returning to their homes in the lockdown period.

Though the three organizations stated that the Central and the state government s have made elaborate arrangements for their safe home return but this process has presented a new challenge-- how to check spread of corona infection.

These organizations in their joint guide lines have mentioned management protocol for people coming back to their homes, home quarantine and precautions to be taken. As per the guidelines, the district administration would register the migrant labourers, get them screened, comply with the protocoal if found corona positive and take precautions for those who are found negative.

The corona positive persons would be quarantined at the government managed quarantine centres where they would be tested for Covid-19. While infected persons will be admitted to hospital, those found negative will be quarantined for 7 days and tested again after expiry of this period. If they are again found negative, they would be sent for 14 days in home quarantine which will be of 21 days, the guidelines state.

During home quarantine if migrant labourer has fever, cough or is suffering from breathing problem then he has to contact Asha or at the government helpline number (1800-180-5145).

During home quarantine, the migrant labourers should be asked to live in separate rooms, use masks or gamchhas for covering their mouth and nose and wash them regularly with hot water and soap. They will have to wash their hands regularly several times in a day, the guidelines further stated.

They should l neither share bed nor utensils with other family members, should wash their utensils with hot water and the family members should not allow any outsider to come inside. They are required to down load Aarogya Setu app on mobile phones and keep sanitation in house. Only one person should be allowed to go outside to for daily needs . On return, he too should wash his/her hands with soap and hot water and use mask or scarf to cover face during visit to markets, the guidelines added. etc.


