Worried about spread of coronavirus, six dists averse to people travelling from Pune
2020-06-09
Pune: Officials from Solapur, Amravati, Satara, Gadchiroli, Kolhapur and Bhandara are averse to people from Pune reaching the six districts due to the rising Covid-19 cases here.

“Travel passes are mandatory for inter-district travel and officials in Solapur, Amravati, Satara, Gadchiroli, Kolhapur and Bhandara are taking time in issuing the conditional clearances to people travelling from Pune,” a senior Pune district administration official said. 

“Administrative officials from these six districts have got in touch with the Pune police, seeking information on the number of people will to travel to the six districts and the reasons,” Pune deputy commissioner of police (crime) Bachchan Singh said. On the basis of this, the officer said, the priorities of the travel requests were being weighed. 

Pune district collector Naval Kishore Ram said stopping people from travelling between districts was not the solution. “What is essential is to ensure strict adherence to the rules issued by the administration,” he told TOI.

In the last week of May, several rural parts of Maharashtra had seen a spike in the Covid-19 cases and blamed the state’s decision to allow inter-district travel. With most of the new patients in these districts were those returned from cities like Pune, Mumbai, Thane, and Nagpur, the state government had continued to restrict the inter-district travel except, for emergency or medical reasons.

DCP Singh, who is in charge of issuing e-passes in Pune, told TOI that the state’s order in paragraph 9 (2) for inter-district and inter-state movement continued to be regulated and, as a result, digital passes were a must to out of Pune to other districts.

Those who have to travel from Pune to other districts have to apply on www.punepolice.com and the applications are scrutinized by the digital passes team. 

“Death and medical emergency cases are processed on a priority. For the six districts,the team emails non-priority requests to the district concerned for approval,” he said. The travel pospect depends on the district’s response. 

Some senior officials said many people were travelling between districts without the mandatory e-pass and this was a cause for concern.


