Worried over safety, pvt hosps reluctant to admit Covid-19 patients
2020-03-28
Bengaluru: Of the 54 Covid-19 patients undergoing treatment in the state, only five are in private hospitals. Officials lament that private hospitals are not shouldering the Covid-19 burden to the extent they can, despite meetings held with their representatives twice in a week. 

At Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Chest Diseases, the state’s nodal centre for Covid-19 treatment, all 15 isolation beds are occupied. Cases coming to RGICD are now being referred to other government hospitals. 

The Federation of Healthcare Associations of Karnataka recently wrote to the government asking it to be ready for the fast-worsening situation with 2,000 critical care beds. The association offered some staff but there is no mention of private hospitals willing to admit patients. 

According to private hospitals, the reason for their reluctance is non-availability of Personal Protection Equipment (PPE) and hydroxychloroquine tablets, which have been prescribed by ICMR for prophylactic treatment of healthcare professionals who will be involved in treating the infected.

“We have repeatedly brought the PPE situation to the government’s notice at every meeting but the equipment is still not available. If the situation does not improve, hospitals will have to shut down. We can’t compromise on the safety of our doctors, nurses and allied personnel,” said the representative of a leading hospital. 

Medical education minister K Sudhakar had earlier stated that patients can choose the hospital at the time of admission and decide if they want to get treated in a private facility. There are 35 first responder private hospitals in Bengaluru, including some private medical colleges. 

In Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, the governments have already moved forward by taking over some private hospitals. The Rajasthan government has taken over a hospital and asked it to shift all its patients to a government medical college. “If the directions are not followed, action will be taken as per IPC Section 188 and Section 57 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005,” says the Rajasthan circular, a copy of which is with TOI. The situation is similar in Madhya Pradesh, where two private hospitals in Indore have been taken over by the government. 

Do not mix patients: Expert

Dr Nagendra Swamy, principal coordinator of Federation of Healthcare Associations Karnataka, said the need of the hour is to keep all Covid-19 patients in one isolated hospital instead of several hospitals which will have many other patients. “There are chances of healthcare workers contracting the infection, which is spreading fast. Private hospitals have other patients too. Medical professionals have to be fit. If they also get infected, where will people go?” wondered Dr Swamy. 


