Covid-19 in Rajasthan: Worried patients with flu symptoms flood hospital
2020-03-22
JAIPUR: While 23 persons have already been tested positive for Covid-19 in the state till Saturday, worried patients having symptoms of cold, cough and fever are rushing to the SMS Hospital for getting the Covid-19 test done.


However, the SMS hospital authorities faced difficulties in handling these patients. Immediately, the SMS hospital made arrangement to deploy six doctors outside emergency unit and also a team of six doctors at out patient department to conduct screening of the patients.


Coronavirus in India live updates

Anticipating that Covid-19 cases may increase in numbers, health department issued directions to all the private hospitals, having capacity of 100 beds, to reserve 25% of the beds for such patients. Since, Covid-19 cases have reported from city’s Adarsh Nagar, Rangoli Garden, Jagatpura and Gopalpura area, the health department is conducting intense screening of the area. They are identifying those patients who have cold, cough and fever and advising them to see doctor and remain in isolation. Over 5,000 such cases have already been identified from these areas.

Concerned over the increasing pressure of patients, SMS medical college principal and controller Dr Sudhir Bhandari held a meeting and issued most urgent out and action immediately directions. He constituted eight member screening team including doctors Dheeraj Saxena, Lokesh Sharma, Dr SK Singhal, Dr Kapil Gupta, two resident doctors and one nursing staff and one consultant in respiratory medicine.

The SMS Medical College has decided to put big hoardings for proper identification of place in front of emergency (garage of ambulance) for screening for Covid-19. Dr Vinay Malhotra will ensure implementation of ICMR testing protocol. Dr SM Sharma, will coordinate with rapid response teams for their movement. He will ensure availability of kits for testing. Dr Bharti Malhotra will provide help for meeting ICMR testing protocol requirements.


