Would serve in Covid ward again: Doctor from Lucknow who recovered
2020-04-08
LUCKNOW: The discharge of three Covid-19 patients, including a doctor, after full recovery from King George’s Medical University (KGMU) on Tuesday came as a morale booster for other patients and the medical team serving infected people round the clock.


Brimming with confidence after recovery, Dr Tausif (25), who had contracted infection while examining Lucknow’s first Covid-19 patient, told TOI: “I have no complaints about getting infected while treating a patient because it’s a doctor’s job. If allowed, I would like to serve again in the same ward.” He is a non-PG resident doctor at KGMU’s department of medicine.

Dr Tausif advised doctors to be extra careful as they are the ones who shoulder the responsibility of steering the country out of crisis. “The 21-day stay in isolation ward was altogether a different experience. I took the same drug that I used to give to patients and underwent similar mental trauma as they do. But believe me, staying positive makes it easy to defeat the virus,” he said. Dr Tausif said he utilised the period of hospitalisation to study more about Covid-19 on the internet.

“I used to make video calls to my parents thrice a day to allay their apprehensions. I also spent time studying and getting my dose of entertainment on the internet,” he said.

Kaif Ali Abdi (20), a postgraduate management student at Lucknow University, who was also discharged on Tuesday said he got infection from his cousin. 

“Initially, I was stressed but counselling by doctors, paramedical staff and even by sanitation workers helped him a lot. I used to talk to my family thrice daily. Pep talk by my parents helped me overcome the crisis,” he said. 

“I am passionate about cars and utilized my time reading about latest cars and their specifications. I also watched web series, movies, news and educational videos,” he said.

The third patient, a 19-year-old student who got infected during his UK visit for a conference, could not be contacted for comments.

KGMU vice-chancellor Prof MLB Bhatt said, “Dr Tausif recovered in 21 days, Abdi in 24 days and the 19-year-old student in 23 days. They have been advised home isolation for next 14 days.”


