Would-be mothers bear brunt of coronavirus lockdown in Patna
2020-04-14
PATNA: The lockdown to contain the spread of coronavirus in the state is taking a toll on pregnant women, many of whom are being forced to skip their routine check-ups and some are not even able to get the regular antenatal tests done on time to detect problems with the growth of the foetus.


Several pregnant women TOI spoke to were further stressed that they can’t go to their parents’ home for their child’s delivery nor can they call in their mothers or relatives to help them during and after child birth.

Patna City resident Asha Devi recalled the mental trauma she went through during her second delivery during the lockdown. The 29-year-old gave birth to a baby girl on April 11. She had to change her gynaecologist at the last moment as the one she used to consult had her clinic at Rajendra Nagar, which was far from her home.

“Because of the lockdown, my doctor was monitoring my situation over video calls. My due date was on May 1. But I developed severe cold and my doctor prescribed me medicines over phone. On April 11 my condition deteriorated and my husband brought me to a private hospital in my neighbourhood and I had to undergo a caesarean section delivery,” Asha recounted, adding, it was difficult for her to travel to her doctor during the lockdown period due to lack of transportation.

Sabzibagh resident Shama Parween face a similar situation. She, too, had to change her gynaecologist at the last moment. “When I called the doctor, she explained her problem and advised me to go to another place as her nursing staff were not able to come. I then went to a missionary hospital and gave birth to a baby boy,” said Shama.

It’s a custom for most families that women return to their parents’ home for child birth. But several such women got stuck due to the lockdown and could not reach their parents’ place. One such case is that of 27-year-old Karishma Tripathi, who is in Bengaluru with her husband and her due date is May 18.

“My parents were supposed to come here on April 10. But due to the lockdown, they could not come,” Karishma told TOI over phone.

She added, “This is my first pregnancy and I am nervous. I talk to my mother over phone and ask her what pain really means. Even in slight pain I get nervous. My baby is under weight and I am not able to get many things, which my mother is advising to eat at this time.”

Patna-based consultant obstetrician-gynaecologist Dr Usha Didwania said her patients, who are close to their full terms, are highly tensed due to the lockdown. Though she is talking to them over phone and seeing their reports on Whatsapp, many are not satisfied with this process.

“In 36th week of pregnancy, antenatal tests are done at least seven to eight times. In seventh month of pregnancy, it is done after 15 days and in the last month it is done after one week. But in this situation, we are advising minimum three antenatal check-up,” Dr Didwania said,

She has strictly advised patients coming for delivery not to come with more than one attendant. “It is not safe for anyone to move around in this situation amid this pandemic,” said Dr Didwania, adding, “There used to be 20 to 22 deliveries at her hospital and since lock down there has been three only three.”

Pregnant woman and their family members are also apprehensive about using hospital beds and other equipment during delivery fearing that the new-born may catch the virus at the hospital.

“Though the hospital staff were ensuring social distancing and cleanliness, I myself cleaned the room in which the baby and my daughter were brought after delivery. We had in fact bought a big sanitizer bottle and wiped the bed and crib. No one knows who had used the room and bed before. My son helped in cleaning the floor,” said 59 -year-old Sheela Sinha, whose daughter Richa Kumari gave birth to baby boy at a private hospital on Monday.

