Yes! I am back: First positive patient returns home after defeating Covid-19
2020-03-27
Nagpur: The software professional who was discharged from the isolation ward of Indira Gandhi Government Medical College and Hospital (IGGMCH) said that the last 14 days were tough, but he rediscovered himself during this period.

“Yes! I am back,” said the 45-year-old, who happens to be the first patient in Central India to test positive for Covid-19, and eventually the first who recovered.

“We need tonnes and tonnes of positivity at this point of time. Bombard it. Ours is a great nation,” he exclaimed when asked about his first reaction after homecoming. He also expects that his wife, who is recovering from Covid-19 at GMCH, will return home by Saturday.

While it was an important development for Vidarbha, authorities kept it low-key, respecting the privacy of the patient and his family. An ambulance of IGGMC drove him to his house. His mother welcomed him in a traditional manner with aarti and applied tilak on his forehead as he stepped into the house. 

His 14-year-old daughter had drawn a beautiful ‘rangoli’ at the main entrance door of the house. The rangoli showed a pair of boxing gloves fighting against the invisible coronavirus. She wrote two words — Fighter and Champion in praise of her father. “I am overwhelmed, short of words,” he said after seeing the rangoli.

The patient, as he earlier told TOI, kept himself busy in reading and thinking positive. As he is a believer in god, he used to read Shrimad Bhagwad Gita regularly. He has done a lot of spiritual thinking and now plans to write a book to inspire others to fight Covid-19. 

“I will share exactly what I learnt during my experience in the 14-day isolation with Corona. I realized that there is a hierarchy of power. Body or physical strength comes at the lowest level of this hierarchy,” he said. According to his thinking, body, mind, intellect, soul and finally god are the right hierarchy of power.

“For body, you need to keep your temperature in control, which is quite easy. For mind, you have to resolve that you are going to fight. For intellect, you need to trust doctors’ knowledge. For soul, you must keep telling yourself that you are beyond all these sufferings. And finally, the super power is god, for which you must believe that god is with me all the time,” he said. 

As common people are also observing the 21-day home quarantine-like situation due to lockdown, this man has a message for all of them. “If I can stay calm and composed in one room of the hospital for 14 days, you all are in your own houses, with your loved ones around you. What is the problem? Just be with your family, pray for all, and take care of yourself,” he quipped. 


