Uttar Pradesh: Enforce Covid-19 protocols earnestly, says CM Yogi Adityanath
2020-04-22
LUCKNOW: Alarmed by the report of 33 persons at a Rae Bareli quarantine shelter testing positive after initial negative results, chief minister Yogi Adityanath said on Tuesday that proper precautions must be taken and social distancing protocols strictly maintained at all isolation facilities.



Coronavirus live updates

CM Yogi said the results of plasma therapy are pleasing and state should adopt it soon. “The 33 persons in quarantine at Rae Bareli tested positive after having tested negative earlier. Thankfully, they did not infect others since they were in shelter. This, however, signals that proper precautions should be taken at shelters,” said an official.

Reiterating the need to scale up testing, Yogi said special arrangements should be made in districts with high infection load like Kanpur, Saharanpur and Meerut and pool testing can start.

 “In Lucknow, only secretariat is functioning and since there are several hotspots in city, the CM said employees living in these areas should work from home and exercise extreme caution,” said additional chief secretary (home) Awanish Awasthi.

Two institutes, including KGMU, are working on plasma therapy, Awasthi said.

During Covid-19 review on Tuesday, Yogi said police, doctors and health workers should must be given protective equipment and asked hospitals to ensure PPEs, masks and sanitizers meet specified standards.

As emergency services have been resumed in hospitals, government said people should visit those cleared by health department.

More than 10,500 students returned from Kota and were sent home. Calls are being made to ensure they stay in 14-day quarantine, he added.

Yogi ordered strict monitoring of vehicles to stop people entering UP as all borders are closed. “A truck was recently caught on Jhansi-Lalitpur border carrying people. They have been quarantined. Only vehicles carrying doctors and essentials should be allowed,” Awasthi said. 

