Young sarpanch shows way in fighting virus
2020-03-30
HYDERABAD: A 23-year-old young woman sarpanch of Madanapuram village in Nalgonda district has been taking rounds of her village to ensure that people stay home during the 21-day lockdown. 


During the first few days of the lockdown, Akhila Yadav, a BSc graduate and sarpanch of the village stood outside her village holding a stick to stop people from entering it without a valid reason. “Earlier, people were not taking the lockdown seriously, I saw people from other villages travelling here for no valid reason. So I sat at the entrance of the village and put up barricades. I would ask them the reason for roaming outside and entering the village if they have a genuine reason, they were allowed to enter. Or else I would ask them to go back,” said Akhila. 

She would stand at the entrance from morning till afternoon. After a break, she would again stand there, till the curfew hour. After the restrictions on people’s movement were tightened, she removed the barricades, but the sarpanch has been regularly taking rounds of the village to ensure people stay home during the lockdown period. 

“This is the time we have to take precautions to save ourselves and loved ones from the pandemic. I know I can’t protect everyone, but this the least I can do for the safety of my village. If one person gets the infection, the whole village can be affected,” she said, adding, “If I find a new vehicle or new faces in the village I enquire about the reason for their visit, especially if someone comes from the city.” 

She has also been asking villagers to take an alternative road while venturing out to buy essentials. The young sarpanch has also been going door-to-door to educate villagers on ways to protect themselves and symptoms of Covid-19. “It is important they know about the symptoms. There are around 1,600 people in the village, and we have distributed around 2,000 masks here. But there is a shortage of hand sanitisers,” she said. 

The sarpanch worked for 10 months in Hyderabad in 2018, before returning to her village and getting elected as sarpanch. 

