Young doctors managing both Covid hospitals
2020-05-13
Nagpur: IGGMCH and GMCH — two government medical college hospitals in city — have converted a major part of their premises into ‘Covid Hospitals’ in last three weeks, making more than 1,100 beds available for Covid-19 patients. While the machinery is set quite meticulously at Covid hospitals, planning for the men behind the machinery is also equally meticulous.

As senior doctors having comorbidities like diabetes, hypertension etc cannot be appointed in Covid Hospitals; the entire responsibility is on the shoulders of young doctors — mostly below 45 years of age. 

They include Group-A specialist doctors, residents of all specialties, lecturers taking MBBS classes, and also on-contract doctors working in the hospitals. Apart from doctors, major responsibility of asymptomatic patients in Covid hospitals is on trained nurses, health workers, and sanitary staff. Teams have been formed in such a way that no one has to work for more than eight hours a day.

Teams are led by Group-A specialist doctors. A team includes PG residents of different faculties teamed together so that they can use their expertise. Further, trained nursing staff, health workers and sanitary staffers are deployed to help medical teams. 

Doctors work in shifts. After working for 14 days, they undergo home quarantine for next seven days. After this period, they are appointed to non-Covid duty or at some other places for next 14 days.

“Even if all beds in GMCH are occupied with patients, we will not face any crunch of health workers or doctors,” said Dr Mohd Faizal, nodal officer of GMCH Covid Hospital. At present, there are 114 patients admitted in the Covid-19 facility in GMCH against its capacity of 475 beds. After completing their duties, doctors live separately in a facility made available by the hospital, and some of them also avail benefit of the free stay given by Hotel Centre Point.

Similarly, at IGGMCH, doctors and health workers to handle entire 600 bed capacity are available. “More than 1,800 doctors, nurses, and staff are s trained for treating Covid-19 patients. Doctors are pooled from all departments,” said Dr Sagar Pande, nodal officer of Covid Hospital at IGGMCH.


