Karnataka: Youngsters caught violating lockdown have a lesson stamped on forehead
2020-03-31
VIJAYAPURA/KOPPAL: From imploring citizens to stay indoors to giving straying youngsters a taste of their lathis and getting those violating the lockdown to sweep the streets clean, police appear to be at their wits’ end to get the citizenry to understand the gravity of the situation. However, several people – mostly youngsters – continue to violate the lockdown, which has driven the cops to despair, and oddly enough, device more effective ways to keep people indoors. 


In a mode of punishment reminiscent of the sort that teachers used on their disobedient wards, police in Vijayapura and Koppal have taken to branding those stepping out of their homes without a valid reason. Youngsters caught wandering at Gandhi Chowk in Vijayapura had the following message sealed on their forehead: ‘I violated the norms of the Covid-19 lockdown and I am an anti-social element.’ A week into the lockdown announced by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, police are clearly infuriated with the cavalier attitude of some people and appear determined to bore the message deep into the minds of the citizens. 

To ensure that the message on their forehead was driven through, the cops gave the errant youngsters a brief summary of the punishment they were inviting by violating the lockdown. 

In Koppal town, cops caught an entire posse of violators, around 50 of them, all of whom were hauled to the police station, which they were asked to clean thoroughly. Some of the cops at the station assisted the youngsters in sweeping the station. 

Koppal town police inspector Mouneshwar Manipatil told TOI that all cops were growing really frustrated with the indifferent attitude of some youngsters. “No matter how many times we tell them not to venture out, they do not heed our pleas. They simply do not listen to us,” said Manipatil, confirming that around 50 youngsters had been made to sweep the Koppal town police station as punishment for violating the lockdown. 

“We wanted to give them a lesson in discipline and ensure that they did not spread the virus,” the inspector said. 


