Young innovator builds robot to help Covid docs
2020-05-10
Tirupati: Thirty-seven-year-old K Pavan, a class 7 dropout from Palamaner, Chittoor district, has developed a robot, which can serve Covid patients with least human intervention. Thus mitigating the risk of doctors and paramedic staff contracting the disease.

Speaking to TOI, the young innovator said he was moved by the plight of doctors and paramedic staff who were falling prey to the virus while attending to Covid-19 patients and decided to develop the robot. After facing challenges in procuring all the necessary material amid the lockdown, Pavan’s robot was finally ready. It passed the healthcare tests on Saturday. He said it cost him Rs 22,000 to develop it.

“The Covid-19 robot, which has a two-way voice and video command protocols and can rotate 360 degrees, can be remotely operated by doctors from a distance of 100 meters. They can use their smartphones to instruct the robot. Doctors can provide medication and food to patients and communicate with them with the help of the robot,” Pavan told TOI.

Pavan plans to donate the robot to the Chittoor district administration so that it can be used at state Covid quarantine facilities. He appealed to the state government to adopt advance technology to mitigate the risks posed by the virus to the doctors and paramedics on duty.

Pavan is known for applying principles of basic science to address various pressing problems in the rural areas. He has come up with 30-odd innovations in the last two decades, which has earned him the monikar of a ‘‘rural innovator”.

His first major innovation was a remotely operable water pump, which helped farmers avoid wastage of water besides helping them save their lives from electric shocks and snakebites. 

Some of his other innovations include, a home burglar alarm, farm alarm to ward off tuskers, which is a perennial menace in Chittoor district, a rural FM station, heart rate monitoring system, two-wheeler security system, power generation from ceiling fan and self operating street light systems for civic bodies. 

They have been developed under the Pavan Empower Solutions.


