Your guide to feeding strays during lockdown
2020-04-09
When the coronavirus lockdown across India was announced, animal activist and MP Maneka Gandhi took to Twitter to request people to feed strays since the animals had no other way of getting food. Following this, the Animal Welfare Board of India also issued an advisory to all chief secretaries of states and Union Territories regarding caring for animals during the lockdown. With markets and restaurants closed, the strays who used to live on scraps and leftovers from these places are suffering. There are many feeders working tirelessly on ground to feed these animals and if you want to pitch in, here’s what you can do: 

You will not face any issues while feeding strays as long as you are following social distancing rules and being careful. Here are some tips from animal activists and feeders:
1. The basic practice that people can follow is to put food and water outside their homes.
2. If you are just feeding strays in your society, feed them there and don't step out. 
3. If you are feeding a large number of dogs, wear mask, gloves and keep sanitiser.
4. Fix one time in the day to feed the animals.
 


Delhi: 
Get movement pass from Delhi Police, feed strays within society or donate to feeders
Divya Puri, co-founder of Karan Puri Foundation, a registered trust working for the welfare of stray animals, shares, "There are no feeding passes in Delhi but the Delhi Police is issuing movement passes. You don’t need a pass if you are feeding strays in your society, but if you are travelling to feed animals, you will need a pass. People can apply online on the Delhi Police website – create an account, fill your details and the reason for your movement, and then you can get the pass in three-four days." For people who don’t want to step out but still contribute, Divya adds, "Each area has their own feeders, you can donate in cash or kind. These feeders can come and collect your donation."
Anil Mittal, ACP, PRO, Delhi Police, says, "We have already issued movement passes to NGOs to feed stray animals, but if an individual wants to feed stray animals, he/she can apply for the pass online from www.delhipolice.nic.in. A pass is not needed if they want to feed strays in their society."


Gurgaon:
 Get a feeder pass from MCG or help the feeders on ground with resources
Animal activist Chetna Joshi from Astitva Animal Rights Enforcement Foundation, who is the POC in Gurgaon for feeding animals during the lockdown, shares, "In Gurgaon, we have around 30 feeders who are feeding more than 50 dogs. I am coordinating between the authorities and feeders. There are many new feeders but we are telling them not to step out on their own. So they are helping those on ground with resources." Earlier, Gurgaon had only movement passes (available via saralharyana.gov.in) and people were feeding strays by collaborating with animal activists. Now, Gurgaon has introduced feeder passes, which are being issued by the MCG. You don't need a pass if you are feeding strays in your society.
Vinay Pratap Singh, MCG Commissioner, Gurgaon, says, "We are facilitating people with feeder passes. We are working with the PFA and the animal shelter at Sadhrana to facilitate movement." Preet Pal Singh, ACP, Chief PRO, Gurgaon Police, adds, "Anyone who wants to feed strays can get in touch with the police officials of the area, and they will help them."


Noida: 
Get feeder pass from CVO or feed strays within your own locality
Kaveri Rana Bhardwaj, President, PFA Gautam Buddh Nagar, says, "In Gautam Buddh Nagar, feeder passes are only given by Chief Veterinary Officer (CVO) via PFA and other NGOs. People can get in touch with PFA Gautam Buddh Nagar and fill an application. The same application would be stamped and signed by the CVO, and that will work as feeder pass. Passes are needed only if people are going outside their locality or crossing state border. The local administration and officials are aware that the volunteers are feeding strays and we are not facing any challenges."
Vrinda Shukla, DCP, Additional PRO, Noida Police, says, "People can feed strays in their area without any pass. If they have to go somewhere far, passes are being issued by the CVO. The police is helping those residents who have contacted us."


-With inputs from Niharika Lal

