Youth tests positive for coronavirus, total cases in Kanpur now 11
2020-04-09
KANPUR: A teenage youth, whose 53-year-old father was tested positive for COVID-19 on Monday, has tested positive for COVID-19 in the city on Wednesday, taking the number of infections to 11.


The youth’s father had history of proximity with Tablighi Jamaat member. Moreover, this was a first case wherein two members of family contracted the deadly pandemic virus. 

The youth, a resident of a locality under the limits of Ghatampur police station along with his mother and three other members of family were quarantined after his father's report tested positive on Monday. The health officials later sent the sample of the youth and four other members of family including his mother to SGPGI Lucknow for testing. 

“On Wednesday, we have received report of 10 people, in which teenage youth was found to be positive. Remaining nine, however, tested negative. His father, who had tested positive is undergoing traetment at COVID 19 hospital," said chief medical officer Dr Ashok Shukla, adding the patient will be be shifted to COVID-19 ward soon.

Meanwhile, all 21 outsiders who reported to the health department on Wednesday, have been quarantined by the doctors. Of the 4941 outsiders recorded by the health department so far, 4,700 persons have been quarantined.

Three more persons tested negative for the coronavirus in the city. One person, after being discharged from the hospital, was allowed to go home.

The total lockdown remained in force in the city on Wednesday too. Police, besides seizing 16 vehicles, challaned 2170 vehicles under the Motor Vehicles Act, and also registered 20 cases against 55 persons for violating section 144 of CrPC.

To ensure supply of commodities to the people, the district magistrate has directed the authorities of the civil supplies department to maintain proper milk supply in the city. He has asked the people to collect milk and dairy products from milk parlours.

Meanwhile, more voluntary organizations have come forward to feed the people in distress through community kitchens. The district authorities released a list of 89 organizations which include Yugantar Social Welfare Foundation, Shamsi Welfare Association which are feeding the needy persons in the city. 

