Youth who returned from Spain is 4th to be hit by coronavirus in Rajasthan
2020-03-15
JAIPUR: A 24-year-old youth who returned from Spain on Friday tested positive for coronavirus during a screening test at SMS Hospital here on Saturday.


With this, the total number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in Rajasthan rose to four, which include an Italian couple and an 85-year-old Indian who returned from Dubai.

 
 

Alarmed with the development, authorities have admitted the youth’s parents and sister to Rajasthan University of Health Sciences (RUHS) while the youth has been kept at the isolation hospital of SMS.

Health authorities said since the state’s lab confirmed the infection, they will not send the patient’s swab sample to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) in Pune.

The youth was studying in Spain. “He flew from Madrid to Delhi and then took a flight to Jaipur on Friday noon,” said a senior officer of the health department.

His parents, who are doctors in different hospitals, were alarmed when their son complained of high fever and other symptoms of Covid-19.

“They directly brought him to the SMS Hospital’s emergency from where he was taken to the isolation hospital. His parents and sister have been admitted to RUHS,” said Narrottam Sharma, chief medical and health officer (CMHO), Jaipur-1.

During the day, Sharma along with his team went to the youth’s Vaishali Nagar home and also visisted at least 12 neighbouring houses.

“We screened at least 60 people in these 12 houses and none of them had any symptoms. Two maids, a domestic help and a caretaker of this family have been home quarantined. They told that they were not at home when the youth arrived on Friday,” Sharma added.

Confirming the case, additional chief secretary (health) Rohit Kumar Singh said, “He tested positive in the lab test. Since we are also an authorised lab, there is no need to send his swab sample to NIV, Pune. We are trying to get the list of passengers of the Delhi-Jaipur Air India flight which the patient had taken.”

Meanwhile, the condition of the 64-year-old Italian tourist is improving with doctors satisfied with his response to the medications.

Doctors said he has been able to maintain a good oxygen saturation in regular intervals when his Bi-Pap mask was removed. His appetite has also improved. “He is gradually improving. On Saturday, we allowed him to be without Bi-pap mask and oxygen support in regular intervals. He is maintaining good oxygen saturation without any support during this period,” said DS Meena, superintendent, SMS Hospital.

Similarly, the condition of the 85-year-old man who too tested positive for coronavirus is improving.

