Zika combat plan to contain spread of coronavirus in Rajasthan
2020-04-04
JAIPUR: The strategy which the state government had adopted to combat Zika outbreak in Jaipur in 2018 will be used to contain the community spread of coronavirus.


Sero surveillance, which is an effective way for measuring the proportion of a population that has antibodies to the relevant infection, will be adopted by the health department to contain the spread of Covid-19. 

It is a tried and tested strategy implemented during spread of Zika in different parts of the state. During Zika spread in 2018, 158 people were infected. At that time, health department teams were deployed to conduct surveillance in and around 3km area radius of Shastri Nagar area, epicentre of the outbreak. Though the state government did not impose curfew, they restricted movement of people in the area. 

However, for containing the spread of Covid-19, the state government took a step further and imposed curfew in affected areas to conduct surveillance. In 2018, the health department conducted sero surveillance, which was quite effective and now the same strategy has been adopted now to contain coronavirus. “It is an antibody test which gives a reasonable idea about weather the person is positive. It will have to be confirmed by diagnostic testing. However, for containment, we can immediately separate positive people so that community transmission is prevented,” said Rohit Kumar Singh, additional chief secretary (health).

However, it has a drawback as it takes five days for a human to develop antibodies for Covid-19 virus after getting the infection. “If a person is infected on April 1, then for the next five days (till April 5), the person will be tested negative in the test done under sero surveillance. He will be tested positive after five days of getting infection. However, for ascertaining that the infection is spreading in the community level, the test is effective as it will be done on larger sample size,” said a senior health department official.

However, currently the health department is conducting PCR test in laboratories. Once a person is tested positive for Covid-19 in antibodies test, his samples will be tested at the laboratory for confirmation. 

Health minister Raghu Sharma said, “There is a fear of spread of Covid-19 at the community level for which they are going to start sero surveillance soon. It will be done in areas adjoining tourist places and other places vulnerable for infection.”

According to the health department, the test is quite simple. The official said the test is just like blood sugar test. There will be stripes attached to a handy machine. A drop of blood will be placed on the stripe and the machine will show the report if the person has antibodies to the virus. 

The sero surveillance is the next stage for screening of the persons for Covid-19. Currently, the health department officials are going door-to-door with a questionnaire and they check if the person has influenza-like illness or he has any contact with a Covid-19 patient or a travel history. But, they do not have any diagnostic test done randomly. Now, these health teams will be armed soon with a handy machine to ascertain the prevalence of virus at the community level.


