Zone classification gets nod; full lockdown in north Kerala
2020-04-18
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: With Centre clearing state’s recommendation to classify Kerala into four zones where lockdown restrictions will vary in accordance with the prevailing intensity of Covid-19 cases, the new arrangement will come into effect on April 20. On Friday night, chief secretary Tom Jose issued an order detailing the nature of relaxations in these four zones.


As per the order, Kasaragod, Kannur, Kozhikode and Malappuram will come under red zone and lockdown will continue without relaxations till May 3. Pathanamthitta, Ernakulam and Kollam fall under Orange-A zone where relaxations will come into effect from April 24. Wayanad, Palakkad, Thrissur, Alappuzha and Thiruvananthapuram are classified under Orange-B zone where lockdown will be partially relaxed on April 20. Kottayam and Idukki where there are no Covid-19 positive cases currently are in the Green zone where also relaxations will be applicable from April 20.

City service buses will be allowed to ply within a district with strict regulations such as not allowing passengers to stand and that everyone should wear masks. Interstate public transport won’t be allowed till May 3. Seating arrangement will be such that the middle seat in a three-seat row should be kept vacant and only one passenger will be allowed in two-seat row.

Movement of private vehicles will be allowed with odd-even restrictions. Vehicles with odd numbers will be permitted on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays whereas vehicles with even numbers will be allowed on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. Exemption from this odd-even scheme will be given to critical services and emergency operations. Women drivers travelling solo or with dependents are exempted from this restriction. Two persons can travel in the backseat apart from the driver, while pillion-riding in two-wheelers is allowed only for family members. However, taxis, autos and cab aggregators will remain off roads, except in case of emergencies.

Restaurants can resume normal functioning with dine-in option till 7pm while parcel sales will be allowed till 8pm. Barber shops can function on Saturday and Sunday but beauty parlours won’t be allowed to open. Insurance companies, cooperative credit societies and recognized NBFCs will also be allowed to function with limited staff in non-red zone regions.

