Pune Zilla Parishad to quarantine hubbies for domestic violence
2020-04-19
PUNE: Hubbies beware! Anybody found indulging in domestic violence would be sent to institutional quarantine.


The Pune Zilla Parishad would send men to institutional quarantine for domestic violence if they do not mend their ways even after counselling. The decision was taken in view of rising complaints of domestic violence from the rural parts of the district during the lockdown.



“We have come up with this order after consulting the Pune rural police. This step is required to curb complaints of domestic violence,” Ayush Prasad, the chief executive officer of Zilla Parishad (ZP), said.

He said, “We have set up a women’s vigilance team comprising women members of the gram panchayat, self-help groups, Anganwadi helpers and workers, among others to keep a watch on these complaints. The committee will counsel men against whom complaints of domestic violence are made. If they do not mend their ways even after that, they will be put under institutional quarantine with the help of local police station in-charge,” said.

According to the order of the ZP, the vigilance committee would be headed by the seniormost member of the gram panchayat. The committee is also supposed to take care of pregnant and lactating women, and children till the age of six.

“We have also told the team members to focus on malnourished children and provide uninterrupted supply of essential goods to the villages,” Prasad said.

Sandeep Patil, superintendent of police, Pune rural, said the ZP and the police were working in tandem. “We haven’t recorded a staggering increase in domestic violence cases, but we are getting four to five cases in a week. This kind of action is needed to send a stern message to the society,” he said.

Vaishali Ranade, senior marriage counsellor of the special cell for women and children, Pune rural, said, “We have been getting at least eight to 10 calls related to domestic violence daily. These complaints are from all sections of the society. Some of the issues have emerged because of the lockdown, too. Since there is financial instability in the lower income class of the society, the men have become frustrated and they are venting out the frustration on their wives. So, some deterrence and out-of-the-box solution is required at the moment to address the problem.” 

