Zydus to test use of Hepatitis C medicine for virus
2020-04-21
MUMBAI: Zydus Cadila announced that its biological therapy Pegylated Interferon alpha-2b, ‘PegiHep’, used in Hepatitis B and C, may emerge as one of the pathways to treat Covid-19. Interferon alpha-2b has been used in the treatment of Covid-19 in China and Cuba, and is a part of treatment guidelines of the Chinese government, it said. 


Zydus has been commercially manufacturing Pegylated Interferon alpha-2b under the brand PegiHep, since 2011 for the treatment of Hepatitis B and C with 1.5 lakh doses being administered. PegiHep is not licensed or approved for the treatment of Covid-19 yet. Zydus has approached the department of biotechnology to investigate the drug’s role for Covid-19, and is ready to undertake clinical trials. The company is also working with USFDA to open an Investigational New Drug (IND) filing for it.

The treatment has emerged after the publication of two non-peer reviewed research articles at bioRxiv and medRxiv, the Covid-19 pre-print servers hosted by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. The first one by the University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, showed evidence of a direct anti-viral effect of Interferon alpha against novel Coronavirus in vitro. The study demonstrated around 10,000 fold reduction in virus titre in cells that were pre-treated with Interferon alpha 48 hours earlier. 



More on Covid-19Coronavirus pandemic: Complete Coverage21-day lockdown: What will stay open and what won'tHow to quarantine yourself at home
Trust the newspaper for your daily verified news 


The second — a group of universities in China, Australia and Canada retrospectively analysed 77 moderate Covid-19 subjects in Wuhan and observed that those who received Interferon alpha-2b showed a significant reduction in the duration of virus shedding period and even in levels of the inflammatory cytokine, IL-6. This suggests that if a long-acting molecule like Pegylated Interferon alpha is given early on in the infection, the patient suffering from Covid-19 will have a significant benefit as the viral load is reduced, lesser IL-6 is produced and virus eliminating specific immune response is generated.

Speaking on the development, Sharvil Patel, managing director Cadila Healthcare said, “At this juncture, as the healthcare fraternity the world over, is exploring options for a safe and efficacious treatment to combat COVID 19, Pegylated Interferon alpha emerges as one such possibility with it’s potential to reduce virus titres when given earlier in the disease and offering better clinical outcomes. We are working with the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and have opened an investigational new drug (IND) filing for Pegylated Interferon alpha-2b for the treatment of COVID-19”.

Additionally, Zydus is already manufacturing Hydroxychloroquine which has been found to be effective in treating patients suffering from COVID-19. The group is also working on an accelerated vaccine development programme which is currently in the animal testing stage and if the results are successful it should enter clinical studies in second quarter of this financial year.


