CPI(M) Calls for 'Peoples' Solidarity Against Coronavirus', Pushes Relief Demands
The party also urged the Centre to scale up the testing of people from different sections of society.
Medics screen Indians who arrived in New Delhi from Wuhan on February 2, 2020. Photo: PTI
New Delhi: Two days after Prime Minister Narendra Modi called for ‘janata curfew‘ on Sunday, the Polit Bureau of the CPI(M) has appealed to people to instead observe the day as ‘Peoples’ solidarity against Coronavirus’.
The statement also released a set of demands to push relief measures, saying the prime minister failed to propose any “concrete steps to deal with the health and economic aspects of this [COVID-19] fight” in his national address on Thursday night.
The party also urged the Centre to scale up the testing of people from different sections of society, especially the ones with the symptoms such as cold, fever and cough. People with a foreign travel history and the ones who have been in contact with them, and showing symptoms, are tested for the virus.
They also insisted on increasing the expenditure on the public health system and allowing the private hospitals to provide free treatment for the affected patients.
Also read: Coronavirus: Supreme Court Bar Association Asks CJI to Declare Vacation for 4 Weeks
As for the economic aspect, the political party called out for a moratorium on bank loans for a year for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and retail traders. Just a day ago, the Federation of Associations in Indian Tourism & Hospitality (FAITH) had also written to the PMO urging the same.
For the workers and employees who have to work from home in light of social distancing, they urged the government to let them be on paid sick leave, and constitute a fund to extend financial assistance/allowances to all workers in the informal and unorganised sector.
Urging the government to expand MGNREGA for 150 days, cash transfer of Rs 5,000 to Jan Dhan accounts and all BPL beneficiaries and free ration for a month through PDS to all BPS/APL families, including migrant labour utilising the huge existing stock of 7.5 crore tonnes in the FCI godowns, CPI(M) calls for an expansion of public distribution system to cover basic needs of people.
“In lieu of the mid-day meal scheme in schools, provide ration kits to the children’s houses/families,” it added.
They tweeted about the same from their official twitter handle.
CPIM Politburo appeals to the people to observe Mar 22 as a day of People’s solidarity in the fight against the #Coronavirus.Since the PM hasnt proposed any concrete steps, people's demands need to be raised. Read about the demands below:https://t.co/bt4dcwP8Jq
— CPI (M) (@cpimspeak) March 20, 2020

