Coronavirus: Supreme Court Bar Association Asks CJI to Declare Vacation for 4 Weeks
The lost days can be adjusted for the forthcoming summer vacation, the association suggested.
A signboard is seen outside the premises of Supreme Court in New Delhi, India, September 28, 2018. Credit: Reuters/Anushree Fadnavis
New Delhi: The Supreme Court Bar Association has asked the Chief Justice of India to stop all hearings for four weeks starting from March 23, as the numbers of coronavirus infections continue to rise steadily in India.
A resolution of the SCBA’s executive council stated, “It has been resolved that the Hon’ble the Chief Justice and Hon’ble Justices of the Supreme Court may considering the feelings and well-being of all stake holders, declare vacation in the Supreme Court for four weeks beginning from Monday the 23rd March for the present”.
The resolution also noted that the SCBA’s executive council is elected to look after the welfare of the top court’s lawyers and “must take decisions accordingly irrespective of the reservations that some Members may have”.
“EC also requests the Hon’ble Court to adjust the lost days in the forthcoming Summer Vacation accordingly. EC resolves to inform the Hon’ble Court of its readiness to help the Institution at any point of time,” it added.
The SC bar association also decided that any further action will be taken after three weeks, “considering the situation”.
Last Sunday, Chief Justice S.A. Bobde held a special meeting to discuss steps for the apex judicial body to function during this pandemic. At the meeting, it was decided that the Supreme Court will introduce video conferencing for court hearings to avoid ‘people-to-people’ contact.
According to LiveLaw, Chief Justice Bobde said that there could only be a possibility of limited shut down at the present instance. He further observed that any demand of the bar and Bench would be subordinated to the medical advice drawn in the meeting.
Resolution by Supreme Court Bar Association by The Wire on Scribd


