Farooq Abdullah Demands That J&K’s Detainees Be Brought Back to State
Hundreds of political workers, leaders and youth were detained following the reading down of Article 370 on August 5 last year.
Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad with Farooq Abdullah in Srinagar on March 14, 2020. Photo: PTI/S. Irfan 
New Delhi: In his first statement after being detained for 221 days, former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister and National Conference president Farooq Abdullah demanded that all political leaders unite and seek the return of detainees lodged in other parts of the country.
Abdullah, who is also Member of Parliament, said in the statement: “Before we allow politics to divide us, I appeal to all political leaders here to unite behind the call to the Union government to bring back all detainees from J&K in prisons outside, pending their release. While we would like to see them all released as soon as possible, pending that, they should be shifted to J&K. This is a humanitarian demand and I hope others will join me in placing this demand in front of the government of India.”
He added that he did not “consciously” issue any statement on the day of his release on Friday. “While I believe a free and frank exchange of political views is essential so that we can take stock of the momentous changes that J&K has seen after August 5, 2019, we are still some way away from an environment where such a political discourse will be possible. This is especially so considering the number of people detained in August last year who remain in jails outside J&K,” he added.
Also read: ‘Kashmiris Don’t Want to Die Cheaply’ Says Former RAW Chief on Absence of Mass Protest
Upon his release, Abdullah had, along with his wife and daughter, visited his son and former chief minister Omar Abdullah, who still remains under detention.
He also mentioned how painful it was for families to be separated from their kin due to such detentions. Abdullah said he was “acutely aware that compared to hundreds of Kashmiri families, I have been far more fortunate”. He added that “when I went to meet my son Omar – also detained under the Public Safety Act – I had to travel a kilometre from my home to be able to see him.”
As such, he raised, the issue of how “for families of most of detainees, meeting their loved ones is not nearly as easy”. The senior NC leader said for these families, “their loved ones have been detained in jails spread across a number of states. They get two visits a month for which they have to spend large sums of money. They can ill-afford travelling to and staying in the vicinity of these prisons”.
Abdullah’s call for moving the state’s detainees assumes significance as hundreds of political workers, leaders and youth were detained following the reading down of Article 370 on August 5 last year.
Abdullah also noted that the risk posed by coronavirus or COVID-19 further necessitate the moving back of these detainees to J&K. “At a time when people are being advised not to travel, these families are being forced to put their lives at risk in order to meet their loved ones for a few short but very precious hours,” he insisted.
