China and India Engage in War of Words Over Delayed Indian Relief Flight to Wuhan
China's foreign ministry denies there has been any delay in permission from its side but Indian officials insist that an aircraft carrying medical supplies has not yet been cleared to fly to the coronavirus-affected city.
People wearing face masks walk at the Tiananmen Gate, as the country is hit by an outbreak of the new coronavirus, in Beijing, China January 27, 2020. Photo: Reuters/Carlos Garcia Rawlins
New Delhi: In an unusual diplomatic verbal volley on Saturday, India and China exchanged words after New Delhi accused Beijing of “deliberately” delaying the granting of clearance for a third evacuation flight for its nationals still stuck in Wuhan, the epicentre of the coronavirus epidemic.
“The Government of China is yet to grant clearance to the flight carrying relief supplies to China which will also bring back the remaining Indian nationals from Wuhan. The Chinese side continues to maintain there is no delay, even on Friday, the day the flight was supposed to go, but inexplicably the clearance has not been given,” said an Indian source on background.
On Thursday, the Indian ministry of external affairs spokesperson Raveesh Kumar had said that they were awaiting permission from China to operate the flight that would take medical relief supplies and then bring back the remaining Indians in Hubei province during the return trip.
However, on Friday, the Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson had replied saying that there had been no delay in permission from their side.
Also read: Coronavirus: China Calls on India to Lift Restrictions, Normalise Movement of Trade and People
“China has been assisting India in flying home its citizens. By far, more than 400 Indian nationals in Hubei have returned to New Delhi. The competent departments on the two sides are still in communication regarding arrangements for the remaining 80 Indian nationals to be brought back. There is no such thing as China delaying granting flight permission,” said Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Geng Shuang.
So far, two flights from Wuhan, operated by Air India, have brought back over 600 Indian nationals, including from neighbouring countries. India was planning to send its largest plan, a C-17 Globemaster of Indian Air Force, for the third flight carrying supplies.
Medical supplies being loaded onto the C-17 Globemaster at Indian Air Force base in Hindon. Photo: Special Arrangement
Geng had also stated that China “attaches high importance to health of foreign nationals in China” and have “offered them all necessary help and will continue to do so”.
At the same time, Geng also added that since China’s prevention efforts have been proven to be effective, Beijing hoped that “relevant countries will respect the WHO’s recommendations and avoid overreacting”.
This was also the message that the Chinese ambassador Sun Weidong had given in his first press conference this week, when he had called for lifting of travel restrictions and normalisation of trade and people movement.
However, a day after the Chinese foreign ministry’s briefing, Indian government sources used explicit words to accuse Beijing of delaying the flight.
Also read: From China to Chhawla: Indian Student Documents Flight from Coronavirus
Noting that the Indian flight carrying medical supplies for China could not go on Friday as it never received clearance from the Chinese side, the sources said, “These supplies have been offered even as India faces tremendous shortage itself, given our ethos of helping others, especially neighbours in their hour of need. Items being supplied are gloves, surgical masks feeding and infusion pumps and defibrilators based on the requirements as indicated by the Chinese side,” they asserted.
Stating that the delay in evacuating the Indians wa causing them “tremendous mental anguish”, Indian government sources noted that relief and evacuation from other countries, including by France, were still going on.
“Why is the Chinese government delaying clearance for the relief flight? Are they not interested in Indian aid provided as our token of support? Why are they creating roadblock in evacuating our nationals from Wuhan and putting them under hardship and mental agony?” asked Indian sources.
A few hours after Indian reports that China was delaying giving permission, Chinese embassy spokesperson Ji Rong denied these allegations.
Medical supplies being loaded onto the C-17 Globemaster at Indian Air Force base in Hindon. Photo: Special Arrangement
“The Chinese side always attaches great importance to the health and safety of Indian nationals in China, and provided assistance and convenience for the return of Indian citizens,” she stated.
Ji pointed out that the current epidemic situation in Hubei province was “complicated” and that the “prevention and control of Covid-19 has entered into a critical stage”.
“We are carefully assessing [the] ground situation, as prevention work requires. Competent departments of the two countries are keeping communication and coordination in this regard. There is no such thing as China deliberately delaying granting flight permission,” she stated in a written statement.
But, the Indian side was not impressed.
They contended that India had submitted its flight plan on February 15, five days before the original date of flight of February 20. “That is five days’ notice. The delay therefore appears deliberate,” said government sources
They added that in between, flights from Japan (February 16), Ukraine (February 19) and France (February 20) had taken off.
“If the work was not critical enough to stop or delay these flights, how did it suddenly become critical for the Indian flight?” asked Indian sources.
Inside view of C-17 Globemaster, packed with medical supplies for Wuhan. Photo: Special Arrangement
They reiterated that the uncertainty was causing “anxiety and mental stress”. “China should grant clearance to the relief flight which can bring the Indian nationals back,” added Indian government sources.
In Wuhan city, associate professor Ashish Yadav and his wife, Neha Yadav have been anxiously following the diplomatic spat on Saturday. They are among the 100-odd Indians who were still in Wuhan and had registered with the Indian embassy for the third flight.
“Really complicated situation right now. I don’t know what should I do now,” he told The Wire after Indian government sources blamed China for the delay.
They had already packed their bags day earlier when the Indian embassy official had personally informed them that they are leaving on Thursday night. They were already given a list of contacts of drivers who would transport them to the airport. “But now we don’t know what is happening”.
Inside view of C-17 Globemaster, packed with medical supplies for Wuhan. Photo: Special Arrangement
The WeChat group of persons who were supposed in the third flight had also been flooded with messages from worried people after Indian media reports about the delay became public.
Article has been updated with the response from Chinese embassy spokesperson Ji Rong and the counter from India.
