Migrant Worker Crisis: Violent Scuffle for Food Packets at Bihar Railway Station
Migrant workers’ struggles have intensified in the past few days as they have been travelling back to their home states without enough food and water.
Migrant workers scuffle for food at the Katihar railway station. Photo: Video grab
New Delhi: A fierce fight broke out at the Katihar railway station between migrant workers for packets of free food being distributed. A tragic video of workers fighting for a packet of food went viral on social media.
These workers, travelling in a special Shramik train from Delhi to Purnea, had stopped mid-way at Katihar railway station. Several of them had been travelling without food for days and when the local administration arranged for free food packets, desperate workers broke into a fight to grab their share.
In the video, several men could be seen fighting and pushing each other. The man carrying the food packets was overpowered and mobbed. In a wild scramble, a few men can be seen taking what they could lay their hands on. Some stood there helplessly.
The group, desperate for their share, can be seen dragging themselves dangerously close to the train. As soon as the train began to move, some can be seen hopping back into the train.
Shubhanan Chandra, the spokesperson of Northern Frontier Railways, told NDTV, “Lunch was being distributed at Katihar. Only one person distributes food per coach. As it was taking time, some lost their patience and pounced on the food. It is very sad. We appeal to people, these are difficult times, they must be patient.”
This was not the only video of labourers struggling for sustenance that has gone viral. In a similar video that was shared on social media, a group of travellers could be seen struggling for food packers at the Barauni station in Begusarai district.
Since the special train services have been started, several labourers have been ferried from cities back to their villages. Most labourers were stuck in cities like Mumbai, Bengaluru, Hyderabad without a job or pay. However, since no travel was available to return home, they were forced to stay back and survive on the ration and food made available by governments and NGOs. In most cases, since adequate help was not available, many have been on the brink of starvation.
At some railway stations, the district administration has tried to arrange food and water supplies for those travelling back home.
Many labourers who could not afford train tickets were forced to cover hundreds of kilometres on feet. In many cases, labourers were forced to make risky choices and travel by rickety vehicles. There have been a series of accidents and many people have died on the road.
In Bihar alone, the state Disaster Management Department is running about 3,665 quarantine centres at the block level in districts where currently over 1.3 lakh migrants are housed. It is estimated that about 2.5 lakh migrants will be travelling to Bihar in 200 trains in the coming week.
Of the 1,005 COVID-19 cases that the state has identified, over 350 are migrant workers who have recently returned.
