COVID-19: With Nearly 3,000 New Cases, India Inches Toward 50,000 Mark
Over the past 24 hours, the total number of cases increased by 2,958 to reach 49,391. With 126 more people succumbing to the virus, the nationwide death toll stands at 1,694.
Migrants form northern states wait for a train to travel home, at Bhiwandi in Thane district, May 6, 2020. Photo: PTI/Mitesh Bhuvad
New Delhi: The death toll due to COVID-19 in India rose to 1,694 with 126 more people succumbing to the deadly virus over the past 24 hours. Meanwhile, the total number of cases has increased by 2,958 to reach 49,391, data released by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare said on Wednesday.
The ministry also stated that so far, of the total 14,183 people that have been cured, 1,457 patients shook off the virus over the past 24 hours. With this, the total total recovery rate stands at 28.72%.
Vardhan reviews situation, preparedness of Gujarat, Maharashtra
Meanwhile, Union health minister Harsh Vardhan today reviewed the preparedness and containment measures taken for COVID-19 management in Gujarat and Maharashtra. During a meeting with the health ministers of the two states, he discussed the situation, actions being taken and preparedness for managing the spread of the virus. Both states have witnessed high number of COVID-positive cases.
Expressing concern at the high fatality rate in some districts, Vardhan said: “States need to focus on more effective surveillance, contact tracing and early diagnosis to reduce high fatality rate.”
In Maharashtra, 984 new coronavirus cases have been reported, taking the total number of positive cases to 15,525. The state also witnessed 34 deaths during the last 24 hours, and the death toll stands at 617.
Of the new cases, a majority of 635 have been reported from Mumbai, which also saw 26 deaths on Tuesday. The total number of cases in Mumbai now stands at 9,758.
Maharashtra government has asked the Indian Army, Indian Navy, Indian Railways, ports and other central organisations in the state to provide intensive care unit beds for COVID-19 patients.
In Gujarat, 441 new coronavirus cases were reported on Tuesday taking the total reported cases to 6,245. While 1,381 patients have recovered so far, 368 passed away.
PM chairs Task Force meet, 30 vaccines under development
Meanwhile, Prime Minister Narendra Modi today chaired a meeting of the Task Force on Corona Vaccine Development, Drug Discovery, Diagnosis and Testing. During this meeting, India’s efforts in vaccine development, drug discovery, diagnosis and testing were reviewed. It was pointed out that over 30 Indian coronavirus vaccines are in different stages of development, with a few going on to the trial stages.
During the meeting, coordination between the academia, industry and government was stressed on and Modi spoke about embedding this process into a standard operating procedure. He said what was possible in a crisis should be a part of routine scientific functioning.
MHA issues SOPs for those stranded in India and abroad
The Ministry of Home Affairs has, in the meantime, issued standard operating procedures for movement of Indian nationals stranded outside the country, as well as for those persons stranded in India who desire to travel abroad.
The MHA noted that many Indian nationals who had travelled to different countries before the lockdown for employment, studies, internships, tourism, business or other reasons got stranded abroad.
“Due to their prolonged stay abroad, they are facing distress and are desirous of returning to India urgently. Apart from the above cases, there are other Indian nationals who need to visit India in medical emergencies or death of a family member. Also, many persons are stranded in India who desirous to travel abroad urgently for various purposes.” In order to facilitate the movement of such persons, it said the SOPs were being issued.
Artists paint a mural to spread awareness about coronavirus, in Guwahati, May 6, 2020. Photo: PTI
MHA writes to West Bengal on cross border trade
The MHA has, on behalf of the Centre, also written to the West Bengal government about it refusal to allow movement of essential goods through the Indo-Bangladesh border. It cautioned that such acts have international implications.
In a letter, Union home secretary Ajay Bhalla wrote to West Bengal chief secretary Rajiva Sinha to protest the state government stopping vehicles carrying essential goods at the international border during the ongoing lockdown. Terming the move a “unilateral action” of the state government, Bhalla said it would have larger implications for the Indian government with regard to its legally binding international commitments.
The letter said West Bengal has not complied with the request of the Centre to the states to allow passage of vehicles carrying essential commodities and bound for neighbouring countries like Nepal, Bhutan and Bangladesh. “As a result, a large number of trucks carrying essential supplies, bound for Bangladesh, are stranded at different border crossing points. A number of drivers of such vehicles, while returning from Bangladesh, have also not been allowed to cross the border, and are stranded in Bangladesh,” he wrote.
The Bengal government today said it would on take a call on the Centre’s request. In a reply to the Union home minister, the state’s home secretary Alapan Bandopadhyay wrote: “We will take a call after considering all aspects. There are a lot of things that need to be looked into.”
