Visuals of Dogs, Man Drinking Milk Spilt on Road Highlight Lockdown Despair
The images have come to symbolise the plight and desperation of the country's poorest and most vulnerable during the ongoing nationwide lockdown.
Twitter video screengrab of the man collecting split milk whilst stray dogs also drink from it. 
New Delhi: Visuals of a man and a pack of stray dogs drinking spilt milk on a road in Agra have become symbolic of the plight and desperation of the country’s poorest and most vulnerable during the ongoing nationwide lockdown to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus.
According to a report in NDTV, after a large milk container overturned and spilt a stream of milk down the road on Agra’s Ram Bagh Chauraha, a pack of dogs started drinking the spilt milk. The dogs were joined by a man who attempted to collect as much milk as possible in a small earthen pot.
The incident allegedly took place a mere 6 km away from the Taj Mahal.
The video, shared by a journalist on Twitter with the caption, “Lockdown impact”, has since gone viral on social media.
Lockdown Impact:
इंसान और जानवर साथ साथ दूध पीने लगे।
आज अगरा के रामबाग चौराहे पर एक दूध वाले की दूध की टंकी गिर गयी।फिर क्या हुआ खुद देखिए। pic.twitter.com/OWvNg8EFIe
— Kamal khan (@kamalkhan_NDTV) April 13, 2020

The sweeping 21-day lockdown imposed on March 24 by Prime Minister Modi, which was extended on April 13, has pushed poor people across the country to the brink. The subsequent lack of livelihood for millions prompted scores of poor migrant workers and their families to traverse large distances on empty highways to reach their homes in villages.
Also read: ‘Let us Go Home’: No Sign of Relief in PM’s Speech, Migrant Workers Take to Mumbai Streets
Last week, the International Labour Organization (ILO) said that 40 crore Indians working in the informal economy risk falling deeper into poverty during the crisis.
While the Central government has announced direct cash transfers and food subsidies to help people, many have claimed that they have not received much by way of food supplies.
On Tuesday, after the prime minister announced that the nationwide lockdown had been extended until May 3, almost 3,000 migrant workers, who had expected the lockdown to end and wanted to return to their respective states, took to the streets of Bandra in Mumbai. With the imposition of the lockdown all economic activity ground to a halt, leaving several daily wage workers stranded in big cities with no means to sustain their livelihood.
Economists claim that India’s economy, which was already growing at its slowest pace in six years, is expected to take a big hit amidst the lockdown as unemployment rises.
