Liquidity Measures Do Not Amount to Fiscal Stimulus, says Chidambaram on Economic Package
While the former finance minister criticised the Centre for completely leaving out informal sector workers, other opposition leaders called the relief package another false promise.
Congress leader P. Chidambaram. Photo: PTI
New Delhi: Former finance minister P. Chidambaram criticised the Union government for completely leaving out India’s informal sector workers from the relief package that finance minister Nirmal Sitharaman spelled out on Wednesday.
While commenting on the fiscal stimulus package, he said, “Let me first point out that there is nothing, absolutely nothing in what the FM said today for the lakhs of poor, hungry and devastated migrant workers who have walked — and many thousands are still walking — back to their home states. This is a cruel blow dealt to those who toil every day.”
Also read: Rs 20 Lakh Crore Booster Shot: Sitharaman Unveils First Instalment Aimed at MSMEs, NBFCs, Discoms
He said that Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s announcement of an economic stimulus worth Rs 20 lakh crore “as expected… and as perhaps it was intended by the government… grabbed headlines”.
“The page, however, was blank,” the Congress leader said.
Advocating that the Union government should have initiated cash transfers to the poor, as eminent economist Thomas Pikkety had said on Tuesday, Chidambaram said that neglecting the poor (approximately 13 crore families) would push many “into destitution”.
While he welcomed the relief to MSMEs – the offer of subordinate debt (Rs 20,000 crore) and equity corpus fund (Rs 10,000 crore) – he said even this measure was skewed in favour of the larger MSMEs (around 45 lakh), while the “bulk of the 6.3 crore” units were “left high and dry”. He said he would still prefer to wait for the “terms and conditions” for the relief measures announced by the finance minister before he could comment with greater authority.
My statement at the AICC Press Conference today. pic.twitter.com/ld0C86Q97I
— P. Chidambaram (@PChidambaram_IN) May 13, 2020

“The devil is in the detail. On the credit guarantee fund, it is not the entire fund that will be actually spent. The expenditure will be limited to the extent of NPAs in the outstanding guaranteed credit to MSMEs. Assuming an NPA level of 20-50 per cent, the actual expenditure over the period of the loans (which may be years) will be a maximum of Rs 3,00,000 crore,” he said.
He further said that the government on Wednesday had announced schemes that would be valued at Rs 3,60,000 crore, while the promise was of a Rs 20 lakh crore package.
Also read: PM’s Relief Package Speech: Opposition Cautious About Details
“Where is the rest of the Rs 16.4 lakh crore?  This government is a prisoner of its own ignorance and fears. The government must spend more, but it is not willing to do so. The government must borrow more, but it is not willing to do so. The government must allow states to borrow more and spend more, but it is not willing to do so. Except for the modest MSME package, we are disappointed with today’s announcements,” he said.
He added that a slew of liquidity-related measures spelled out by the government do not qualify as fiscal stimulus. “Such measures do not amount to fiscal measures of support and nowhere in the world are they included or counted in a fiscal stimulus package,” he observed.
What did other opposition leaders say?
Other opposition parties hit out at the government for not catering to the more immediate needs of the economy. The Communist Party of India (Marxist) general secretary said that there was nothing in the package for the working classes who have been the worst victims of the lockdown. He said that although the states, which are at the forefront of the fight against the coronavirus pandemic, have been asking for funds from the Centre, the finance minister did not bother to address the issue at all.
We are witnessing the pettiest form of politics from Modi govt. There is nothing for the state govts which have been asking for funds, as they are at the forefront of fighting the pandemic. Nothing for them, not even their legitimate dues! https://t.co/lBYj0zYp9i
— Sitaram Yechury (@SitaramYechury) May 13, 2020

On the reduction of employees provident fund contribution from 12% to 10%, as announced by Sitharaman, Yechury said, “What a ‘package’! People’s own money, being packaged back to them as refunds and a boost! People’s own savings and income tax refunds being given back to them – How can this be a ‘stimulus’?”
Manoj Kumar Jha of the Rashtriya Janata Dal said that Modi’s much-touted relief package was yet another false promise. He said that by ignoring millions of workers from the relief package, the Prime Minister has once again indicated that his motto of “self-reliance” was only meant to ask the poor to fend for themselves.
जब आत्ममुग्ध नेतृत्व ‘आत्मनिर्भरता’ और ‘आपदा को अवसर’ में बदलने की कोरी गप्पबाज़ी करते हैं तो बरबस इस प्रकार की हजारों छवियाँ हमें आइना दिखा देती हैं.राजनीतिक विरोध से दूर आइये हम सब विकास और प्रगति के इस ‘लोक-विमुख’ प्रतिमान को जोर से ना कहें. pic.twitter.com/X9qwiO1Xxz
— Manoj Kumar Jha (@manojkjhadu) May 13, 2020

Trinamool Congress MP Derek O’ Brien, too, accused the Centre of “killing federalism” as there was nothing in the financial package to aid the states.
“People were hopeful to get some relief… but it’s a big zero! Nothing for States. Nothing to fight Covid. Killing federalism. How will States run?” says @MamataOfficial
What’s real cash outgo in ‘20 lakh cr’ package?
No answers.
We wanted urgent policy action, we got faff.
— Citizen Derek | নাগরিক ডেরেক (@derekobrienmp) May 13, 2020

