Armed Forces to Conduct Fly-Pasts, Shower Petals on Hospitals on May 3
"We are expressing our gratitude to all 'corona warriors' who are working hard to keep us safe," CDS General Bipin Rawat said, while addressing a press briefing along with the three service chiefs.
Chief of Defence Staff General Bipin Rawat, Air Chief Marshal Rakesh Kumar Singh Bhadauria, Navy Chief Admiral Karambir Singh and Chief of Army Staff General M.M. Naravane at the press conference on May 1, 2020. Photo: PTI/Manvender Vashist 

New Delhi: The armed forces will express their gratitude to all “corona warriors” by conducting fly-pasts, showering petals on hospitals treating COVID-19 patients and illuminating naval vessels, Chief of Defence Staff General Bipin Rawat said on Friday.
Addressing a special press briefing along with the three service chiefs, General Rawat said the nation stood together in dealing with the coronavirus pandemic.
“We are expressing our gratitude to all ‘corona warriors’ who are working hard to keep us safe,” he said.
The Indian Air Force will carry out fly-pasts across the country on May 3 to display gratitude to coronavirus warriors, the CDS said, flanked by Army chief General M.M. Naravane, Navy chief Admiral Karambir Singh and Chief of Air Staff Air Chief Marshal R.K.S. Bhadauria.
General Rawat said the Indian Air Force will conduct fly-pasts from Srinagar to Thiruvananthapuram, from Dibrugarh to Kutch as thanksgiving to the coronavirus warriors. Fixed wing and fighter aircraft of the IAF will participate in the fly-pasts on May 3 evening, he said.
Also, Navy helicopters will shower flower petals on hospitals treating COVID-19 patients, the CDS said.
There are some special activities that nation will get to witness. Air Force to conduct flypast from Srinagar to Trivandrum & another one starting from Dibrugarh in Assam to Kutch in Gujarat. It’ll include both transport & fighter aircraft: Chief of Defence Staff Gen Bipin Rawat
— ANI (@ANI) May 1, 2020

The Army will conduct mountain band displays along some COVID-19 hospitals in almost every district, while naval ships will conduct special drill and illuminate vessels to convey gratitude to the “corona warriors”, Rawat said, adding that the armed forces are solidly behind those fighting the coronavirus pandemic.
Rawat also asserted that no operational task has been affected or will be affected due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
