Railways, Bus and Metro Services all but Shut Down to Combat Coronavirus Spread
There is no estimate of the vast number of people who are stuck in their journey home as a result of sealed borders and stopped transport.
Lockdown in Kullu. Photo: PTI
New Delhi: As India’s efforts to contain the spread of the coronavirus intensified on Sunday, the Indian railways – one of the world’s largest rail networks – has halted all its more than 13,000 passenger trains with effect from 4 am on March 22 till March 31. 
Freight trains will, however, continue “to ensure the essential supplies in various parts of the country,” the Ministry of Railways said in a statement. 
The railways have reported several incidents in the last week where people who were supposed to be in quarantine were found to be travelling. Migrant workers had also begun to travel back home in trains, particularly in Maharashtra, which so far has the highest number of COVID-19 patients. 
Also read: Coronavirus Fallout: From Maharashtra, an Exodus of Migrant Workers With No Work
According to the Central Railways, people numbering over a lakh had travelled to states in the north and east only on Saturday. This increases the risk of the infection being carried from the urban centres to rural India where the primary health care facilities, particularly in the north and the east of the country, are severely lacking. 
There have also been reports of workers who made the journey to their states having been stuck at the train or bus stations with the state in question having stopped all bus transport. 
The Railways said in its statement that only trains that had begun their journeys before 4 pm would be allowed to complete journeys. It added that passengers who had been booked on trains and would be unable to travel due to the shutdown can claim a full refund on bookings till June 21. 
However, the announcement came even as people were waiting at the stations to board. They have now been left stranded. 
The railway ministry addressed the situation by allowing people who were staying in the stations retiring rooms to continue their stay at least till March 31. However, the government has not specified whether the people will have to pay for the extension of the stay. 
In addition, all interstate bus services too have been suspended as at least 75 districts have been put under a lock down by the Centre. Several states like Bihar, Punjab and Kerala have announced a near complete lock down where all, or almost all, intra state bus services too have been suspended. 
The Delhi metro too has been shut completely till March 31. “The move is aimed at controlling the spread of coronavirus by ensuring social distancing and encouraging people to stay at home for the time being,” the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation said. 
Looks like we’ll be taking an extended period of rest and social distancing. We hope you do too. Stay home and stay safe. pic.twitter.com/NtqsX0DGhO
— Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) March 23, 2020

The life line of Mumbai, the local train network, too has been suspended as the city is emerging as a hotspot of the contagious virus. 
On realising that even shutting down private offices and sizing down government officers functioning to the bare minimum of five% had not deterred Mumbai residents from commuting, the Central and Western Railways stepped in and announced a complete shutdown of Mumbai locals on March 22.
“Kindly note that Mumbai Suburban services of Western Railway will not be run from 24.00 hrs of 23/03/2020 i.e. from the midnight of 22/03/2020 till the midnight of 31/03/2020,” the Western Railway tweeted. 
In the wake of coronavirus outbreak, IR announced that all outstation trains will stand cancelled up till March 31.
Suburban local train services in Mumbai shall also remain cancelled till March 31. @drmbct @RailMinIndia https://t.co/26y4yLD46R
— Western Railway (@WesternRly) March 23, 2020

Local trains are considered to be the city’s lifeline and according to the government figures, the network carries over 60,000 passengers per km per day.
In the absence of train services, the Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport (BEST) will continue with its services. But only 1,253 buses of a fleet of over 4,000 will be running. This number is also likely to drop in the coming days.
