Kuala Lumpur: 300 Indians Stranded at Airport, Jaishankar Approves Return Flights
Mentioning that the flights were to be AirAsia, the external affairs minister has asked the passengers to contact the airline.
Photo: Reuters
Thiruvananthapuram: After news emerged that at least 300 Keralites, including many students, have been stranded at the Kuala Lumpur airport following cancellation of flights to India due to the coronavirus outbreak, India’s external affairs minister S. Jaishankar tweeted that his ministry had approved flights for them to Delhi and Visakhapatnam.
Appreciate the difficult situation of Indian students and other passengers waiting in transit at Kuala Lumpur airport. We have now approved @AirAsia flights for you to Delhi and Vizag.
These are tough times and you should understand the precautions. Please contact the airline.
— Dr. S. Jaishankar (@DrSJaishankar) March 17, 2020

Mentioning that the flights were to be AirAsia, Jaishankar has asked the passengers to contact the airline.
Those stranded have come from various countries including the Philippines, Cambodia and Malaysia.
“We are students from Philippines. We have been stranded since the past few hours as many flights have been cancelled. We cannot go back to Philippines and neither is the Indian government is prepared to take us. We are trying to contact Indian officials. None of us want to go back to Philippines,” a woman said in a video telecast by various channels.
Also read: List Suggests 254 Indian Pilgrims in Iran Have Tested Positive for COVID-19
According to her, there are many others who have been waiting for hours at the transit airport at Kuala Lumpur airport.
After they got boarding passes, they were informed that flights have been cancelled, some of them said in a video. Flights to Kerala, Bengaluru and Chennai have also been cancelled, the passengers said.
Jose K. Mani, a Rajya Sabha MP, said he had got in touch with Indian officials. Most stranded passengers are Indian citizens, he said.
In another video, a woman, unable to control her tears, was seen pleading with authorities to airlift them from Italy. “We can only ask our state and central governments. We want some information if we can come back,” she said.
