Now, Mobile Surveillance to Check if Quarantined People Have Violated Orders
Delhi government will share data of over 25,000 such people with police, warns Kejriwal.
Kejriwal addresses an earlier conference. Photo: Twitter/AamAadmiParty
New Delhi: Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal on April 1, declared that the Delhi government has decided to share the phone numbers of all those people who were instructed to self-quarantine at home, so that it can be monitored if they have been following instructions.
He said such electronic monitoring has proved effective in countries like Singapore and South Korea and now Delhi too would be using it to curb the spread of COVID-19.
Speaking about the initiative taken to streamline the fight against the spread of the virus, Kejriwal said: “In some countries…they track phones of people who have been told to self-quarantine. This morning in the meeting between L-G [Lieutenant Governor Anil Baijal] and me it was decided that with the help of police we will trace the movement of such people who have been asked to stay at home.”
Police will track the phones of those who were directed home quarantine to see if they complied or not. Action will be taken against those who violated. In such cases, their contacts will also have to be quarantined. pic.twitter.com/d1whZRpBgb
— Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) April 1, 2020

He said the government has come to know that many of these people have been going out of their houses and this could pose a major threat to others. So the chief minister said that his government has shared 11,084 phone numbers with police to keep the owners of the numbers under watch. “Another 14,345 will be given today,” he said, warning that “action will be taken against those found violating self-quarantine orders”.
Such directions for self-quarantine have been issued to those who have returned from abroad or who are suspected to have come in contact with COVID-19 patients.
Kejriwal also urged the Centre to provide more testing kits and personal protective equipment to the doctors and healthcare workers. He said the Delhi government has also decided that Rs 1 crore would be paid to the next of kin of any health worker or doctor who dies while treating coronavirus patients.
On the issue of providing free rations to the poor, the chief minister said that while release of ration to around 71 lakh people covered under the public distribution system has already begun, the government has also decided to provide rations to those who do not have a card.
“But to ensure that people do not take more than what they are entitled to, we have opened the process of applying for rations through our e-platform. Those who are poor and do not have ration cards can apply for a ration card through this portal and we will provide ration to them till the time the coronavirus threat persists,” he said, adding that such applications would not result in a regular ration card.
Kejriwal said Rs 5,000 has also been paid into the account of 35,000 construction workers as part of the steps to prevent a flight of people to their native places from Delhi.
Today being April 1, he said, many firms and companies have urged the Delhi government to provide them access to their offices so that they may be able to prepare the salaries. “People are saying we will only be able to make salaries on reaching home. For all such employers and owners we have decided to give personnel and vehicle passes for two people for two days so that they may be able to disburse salaries. But we want salaries to be paid in full and no cuts to be made.”
