Kent RO Issues Apology After 'Infected' Maid Advert Sparks Social Media Backlash
The ad showed a pair of hands kneading dough, with the caption, “Are you allowing your maid to knead dough by hand? Her hands may be infected.”
The advertisement by Kent RO systems. Photo: Twitter
New Delhi: On Tuesday, Kent RO systems, got into a bit of hot water when it posted an advertisement for a bread maker on Instagram which heavily implied that those employing domestic workers should be concerned about whether they were ‘infected’. Former dancer, actor and BPJ MP from Mathura Hema Malini has been associated with the brand since 2005, and features in the advert as well.
So, the advertisements are shot and / or released with out her preview and consent ?
You did not even bother to see that adv has her picture with her daughter
— none et al (@None_et_al) May 27, 2020

The ad showed a pair of hands kneading dough, with the caption, “Are you allowing your maid to knead dough by hand? Her hands may be infected.”
Also read: It Is Time to Stop Seeing Domestic Workers as COVID-19 ‘Carriers’
This led to outrage on social media as individuals called out the brand for its discriminatory implications.
This Kent Ad provoked some thoughts. In a classist way the ad suggests that only a maid’s hand could be unclean. As a working woman who’s life has been made easy by maids, I am indebted to these women who slog their ass to feed their families. Pity that Ad maker ridicules it. pic.twitter.com/6Z2ngK3Hny
— shruti (@vyasshruti) May 27, 2020

After ‘Kent ka shuddh pani’, here comes Kent’s ‘shuddh atta’. And its ‘shuddhta’ or purity is a slur on humanity. Time has come to #BoycottKent. https://t.co/NEUz3iNlzx
— Dipankar (@Dipankar_cpiml) May 27, 2020

Watch | Korona: An Animated Reminder of the Real Indian Lockdown
I presume #Kent Atta maker doesn’t want my business. Not only is it unfair to service demographics by assuming all are unhygienic, also assumes me or my husband do not knead atta. A great product bites the dust cos the Ad agency/Product Manager couldn’t see beyond their biases. https://t.co/lVCmjNG5Qp
— Avtar Dr Saundarya Rajesh (@SaundaryaR) May 27, 2020

Some pointed out that the advertisement was merely reflecting entrenched social practices.
This should not surprise us because this is who we are pic.twitter.com/U0jKQe40Jb
— T M Krishna (@tmkrishna) May 26, 2020

Kent is infected by some impure hearts and unhealthy minds. pic.twitter.com/3JZZEEApz1
— Arun Bothra (@arunbothra) May 26, 2020

The Quint reported that Sree Jagruti Samiti, an organisation which works for the rights of domestic workers, has called for a boycott of Kent products, saying, “Shamelessly endorsed by Hema Malini and Brahmanical purity!!! The Advertising council must force and punish the company, for the putrefying ad …on how Kent products to be bought, to save oneself from the unhygienic domestic workers’ hands! Call upon all human beings to boycott Kent products, withdrawal of ad immediately,” read a statement by Geeta Menon, head of the organisation.
“In these times of vulnerability and safety of all, discrimination, prejudice, caste and communal are in the DNA of some of the privileged classes and companies We see it from homes, to relief work, to factories, to schools, to even hotels. Our union survey conversations reveal that the impact of COVID-19 has been tremendous! 80% of domestic workers told not to come, effectively keeping them out of work, out of reach for two months! 70% not paid April salaries, 50% of those above 50 years dismissed arbitrarily!!! Many employers have cited hygiene, bringing the virus, etc (sic)” read the statement.
The Chairman of Kent has since issued an apology for the messaging, saying that it was “unintentional and wrongly communicated.”
Press Release pic.twitter.com/zUPQubmDvK
— Kent RO (@KentROSystems) May 27, 2020

Hema Malini has yet to make any statement in connection with the issue.
The digital agency which appears to be responsible for the messaging on behalf of Kent RO is Imarti Immersive Marketing.
