'Azaan May be Carried Out,' Says Delhi Police, After Video of Policemen Enforcing 'Ban' Goes Viral
A video of two policemen conversing with a few members of the Muslim community is doing the rounds on social media.
Representative image. Photo: Reuters

A video of two policemen conversing with a few members of the Muslim community is doing the rounds on social media.
In the video, the policemen can be heard saying that there will be no ‘Azaan’ and this is an order by the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi. Delhi-based journalist and author Saba Naqvi posted the video (now deleted) and asked, “Is azaan during #Ramzaan now not allowed in Delhi?”
According to her tweet, the video is from riots affected Mustafabad. However, if one listens carefully, the policemen can be heard saying, “You go to Rohin Nagar police station and see the order”. The month of Ramzan starts from April 25, 2020.

Alt News has received several requests to fact-check the video.
@AltNews kindly verify this video. Here, cops are claiming that @LtGovDelhi ordered a ban on azaan during ramzan. Is this true, how can azaan violates social distancing??@zoo_bear @free_thinker @thisisjignesh pic.twitter.com/3O4AP4eRkO
— Khushboo Khan (@Khushbookhan_) April 23, 2020

On our official Android application, the video has been uploaded with the following message – “दिल्ली किराड़ी में रमज़ान में सभी मस्जिदो में आजान नही देने का फरमान पुलिस ने कहा LG साहब का ऑर्डर है” reads the viral text.
[Translation: In Delhi’s Kirari, it has been ordered that there will be no Azaan in all the mosques during Ramzan. Police says that this an order by the LG.]

Delhi’s Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia took to Twitter and clarified that there is no restriction on Azaan. “In the lockdown, there is a complete ban on assembling of people for prayers in mosques or at any other religious places,” said the Dy. CM.
अजान के लिए कोई पाबंदी नहीं है. लॉकडाउन में मस्जिदों में नमाज़ के लिए इकट्ठा होने या किसी अन्य धार्मिक स्थल पर पूजा आदि के लिए लोगों के इकट्ठा होने पर पूरी तरह पाबंदी है. https://t.co/OxYGiqaIrR
— Manish Sisodia (@msisodia) April 24, 2020

Delhi police also tweeted that while people are expected to follow the lockdown rules when they are observing Roza and prayers, Azaan may be carried out in accordance with NGT guidelines. “It is requested that namaz may be performed while staying indoors and have Sehri at home,” reads the message posted by Delhi police.
Important Information. pic.twitter.com/wCXgaWIqoX
— #DilKiPolice Delhi Police (@DelhiPolice) April 24, 2020

While speaking with BBC Hindi, Rohini DCP SD Mishra said, “I saw the video this morning. Actually, the constable didn’t understand the difference between Azaan and Namaz and made the false claim. Due to social distancing [norms], offering namaz at mosques is prohibited but there is no restriction on Azaan.” He informed that disciplinary action has been taken against the constable for spreading false information. He added, “No such order from the office of Lieutenant Governor has been issued. We have informed the maluvis of all the mosques in the area.”
In Islamic tradition, Muslims are summoned to perform five congregational prayers (Namaz) a day via the Azaan or call to prayer. Due to coronavirus pandemic, congregational prayers are suspended and namaz can be offered at home.
A video of a policeman who falsely claimed that the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi has issued orders to ban Azaan in mosques has spread panic among the Muslim community.
This article was originally published on Alt News. Read here.
