COVID-19 Briefing: Central Teams Turn in Pune, Jaipur Reports; Health Ministry Asks to Fight Stigma
"COVID-19 does not see age, religion, colour, caste, creed, language or border," said Lav Agarwal, quoting PM Modi.
Representative image of police personnel in Jaipur during the lockdown. Photo: PTI
New Delhi: The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) on Monday released the feedback reports written by two of the six inter-ministerial central teams (IMCT) it had sent for on-the-spot evaluation of four states – Rajasthan, Maharashtra, West Bengal and Madhya Pradesh.
MHA joint secretary Punya Salila Srivastava, while addressing the daily press briefing, read out the report of the two IMCT teams at Pune and Jaipur.
“The IMCT in Pune conducted detailed inspection at the Pimpri-Chinchwad, Baramati and Kharalwadi containment zones, shelter camps set up for the migrant workers, hospitals, Zila Parishad control room, PDS shops, vegetable market and Nagar Nigam war room. It found that the doubling rate in Pune is seven days which is higher than the national average. A positive case is tested on an average of 13 samples while nationally it is found on an average of 9 samples,” the joint secretary said.
Also read: There Is Little to Be Achieved by Debating Who Let the Novel Coronavirus Out
The IMCT has suggested that Pune should focus on identification of high risk population, surveillance, contact tracing and testing. It has also recommended that in slum areas, instead of home quarantine, institutional quarantining must be practiced.
Sharing the Jaipur IMCT report, the MHA said, “The team has suggested authorities to ensure that lockdown is not broken in the walled city area during evening, ration and essential services should be more organised, quarantine facility must be shifted from populated areas, testing must be increased and non-COVID hospitals must be identified.”
Lav Agarwal, joint secretary at the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) said, 6,184 people have been cured nationwide till now and the recovery rate stands at 22.17%.
There have been 1396 new positive cases taking the total to 27,892 till date
6184 patients have been cured till date
What is a positive indicator is that our recovery rate is increasing: ⁦@MoHFW_INDIA⁩ #coronavirus. #IndiaFightsCorona pic.twitter.com/ctAf8XDWUr
— PIB India #StayHome #StaySafe (@PIB_India) April 27, 2020

In the last 24 hours, 1,396 confirmed cases have been reported, taking the total confirmed cases to 27,892. Out of these, 20,835 are under active medical supervision.
A total of 85 districts in 25 states and Union Territories have reported no cases in the past 14 days. To the total of 16 districts that have not reported any case in the past 28 days, three districts have been added, Gondia in Maharashtra, Davanagere in Karnataka, and Lakhisarai in Bihar.
Two districts that had reported cases earlier but none in the past 28 days have now reported fresh cases. These are Pilibhit in Uttar Pradesh and SBS district in Punjab.
He said that the Prime Minister had a video conference with the chief ministers in which he urged them to remain vigilant. “During his address, the PM said that in the red and orange districts, the states have to focus on breaking the transmission chain of virus and in the green districts, focus on surveillance. The mantra is to convert red districts to orange, and orange to green. He also mentioned that Dialysis and other treatment must not be ignored,” said Agarwal.
Also read: India’s COVID-19 Testing Conundrum: Why the Govt and Its Critics Are Both Right
Raising concerns about the stigmatisation of frontline workers including sanitary workers, health workers and police, Agarwal shared a video of the police and other forces working to ensure that the lockdown is not violated. “Due to lack of awareness and proper understanding, patients hide this disease. They must realise that this would not just affect them, their families but also the whole society. We must stop the spread of misinformation and panic. No community or area must be labelled,” he said.
Agarwal also clarified that recovered patients don’t transmit COVID-19, in fact, they are a potential source of healing, he said. Their plasma, that have developed antibodies to fight this disease can be useful for other patients.
He concluded by repeating the the prime minister’s words, “COVID-19 does not see age, religion, colour, caste, creed, language or border. Our response and conduct thereafter should attach primacy to unity and brotherhood. We are in this together.”
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation’s secretary Parameswaran Iyer, who is heading the Empowered Group on supplies and logistics, also highlighted improvements in key supply chain indicators from March 30 till April 25.
“Mobility of trucks moving food and pharma, which was 46% on March 30 has gone up to 76% on April 25. Movement of rakes has hiked from 67% to 76%. The traffic handled by ports has seen an increase, moving from 70% on March 30 to 87% on April 25. Operations in major mandis have also similarly registered an increment from 61% to 79%,” said Iyer.
He also added the milk and LPG supply has been unaffected by the lockdown.
During the question session, Agarwal repeatedly evaded questions on the status of RT-PCR kits. On being specifically asked for the number of COVID-19 tests conducted in a day, he remained vague. “We conduct sufficient tests. I don’t have the exact figures since ICMR representative is not present here…” he said.
