Rahul Gandhi, Priyanka Gandhi Address Public and Congress Members Over COVID-19
The Gandhi siblings called for more responsibility on the part of the government and in disseminating information on the crisis.
Congress leader Rahul Gandhi and party General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra during an election campaign rally in Sangam Vihar. Photo: PTI
New Delhi: Congress leaders Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi Vadra have issued statements for the public and the Congress party members stressing that a more “responsible approach” could be undertaken to curb the spread of COVID-19.
In his statement, Rahul Gandhi commended health workers, sanitation workers, district administration and other workers offering essential services in Kerala for their exemplary courage and spirited fight against the COVID-19.
While explaining how several countries have enforced isolation and social distancing to contain the spread of infection and reduce fatalities, he said that the next four weeks are crucial to contain the pandemic in India and requested people to make urgent lifestyle changes.
I am feeling sad, because this was completely avoidable. We had time to prepare. We should have taken this threat much more seriously and have been much better prepared. #CoronavirusPandemic https://t.co/dpRTCg8No9
— Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) March 24, 2020

He appealed to the masses to maintain social distancing and avoid public places such as grocery stores as much as possible. He also urged to help the elderly and disabled people and offer paid leaves to their helpers who are struggling to make ends meet.
He called for national solidarity and unity and appealed the public to strictly follow all the public safety advisories and remain vigilant.
Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, general secretary and in-charge of the eastern Uttar Pradesh, urged the district and the city committee presidents to form ward-wise WhatsApp groups so that they could remain updated about the situation prevalent in their areas and motivate the persons showing symptoms to get the test done immediately.
She also requested them to inform the department about patients so that they could seek treatment quickly and also make a list of the elderly persons in their respective wards and offer them help.
Taking note of the misinformation and rumours disseminating on COVID-19, she asked them to debunk it and provide the right information about COVID-19 to the patients and their family, over WhatsApp or phone call.
She asked them to help the administration in strictly implementing the lockdown, curfew and social distancing and also, assist the administration in supplying food to the poor and homeless in their areas.
