Congress Will Pay For Migrant Workers' Journeys Back Home: Sonia Gandhi
The Congress president criticised the Central government for not recognising its responsibility.
Congress president Sonia Gandhi. Photo: PTI
New Delhi: The Congress on Monday said its state units will bear the cost of rail travel for all needy migrant workers and labourers stranded at their workplaces due to the coronavirus-induced lockdown and seeking to return home.
Congress president Sonia Gandhi in a statement announced the party’s decision and said this would be the Congress’s humble contribution in standing shoulder to shoulder with these workers.
She also accused the Central government and the Railways of completely ignoring the demands made by the Congress for ensuring the safe and free travel of migrant workers and labourers to their homes.
Statement Of Congress President Smt. Sonia Gandhi
The Indian National Congress has
taken a decision that every Pradesh
Congress Committee shall bear the cost for the rail travel of every needy worker and migrant labourer and shall take necessary steps in this regard pic.twitter.com/kxruKa0xgI
— Congress (@INCIndia) May 4, 2020

“There needs to be provisions for the safe and free rail travel of migrant workers and labourers to their home-towns. However, despite our repeated demands, the central government and the Rail Ministry have chosen to completely ignore the same.
“The Indian National Congress has, therefore, taken a decision that every Pradesh Congress Committee shall bear the cost for the rail travel of every needy worker and migrant labourer and shall take necessary steps in this regard,” she said in a statement.
Also read: Kashmir’s Migrant Workers Face yet Another Lockdown at the Start of a Work Season
Gandhi noted that lakhs of migrants continue to walk hundreds of kilometres to reach back their homes without food, water, medicines and cash.
She criticised the Central government for not recognising its responsibility and said if it can bring back free of cost citizens stranded abroad by air, why can’t the same responsibility be shown towards the poor migrants who are considered ambassadors of the nation’s growth.
