COVID-19 Briefing: Health Ministry Notes Rise in Recovery Rate to 25%
The government refused to shed light on loosening of lockdown norms since May 3. 
Homeless people rest at shelter home during the nationwide lockdown, in the wake of coronavirus pandemic, at Versova in Mumbai, April 30, 2020. Photo: PTI
New Delhi: The Union health ministry on Thursday asserted that the recovery rate for COVID-19 has improved to 25%, while the fatality rate has been recorded at 3.2%.
In the last 24 hours, India’s total number of recorded cases has gone up to 33,050, after 1,718 new cases were reported, health ministry joint secretary Lav Agarwal told reporters.
He further claimed that the recovery rate for COVID-19 has improved from 13.06% to over 25% in the last two weeks. “[As many as] 8,324 COVID-19 patients, which is 25.19% of the total cases, have recovered so far,” he added. There have been 630 recoveries in the last one day.
Besides, 67 news deaths have been reported nationwide. The senior health ministry official said that the fatality rate stands at 3.2%.
Giving an analysis of ages of patients who have died due to coronavirus infection, he said that majority of the deaths had occurred in the age bracket of above 60 years. While 42% of the deaths occurred in the 60 to 75 years age group, the oldest bracket – 75 plus – accounted for just 9.2% of fatalities.
Also read: The Public Sector Is Crucial for Self-Reliance in Vaccines and Public Health
Besides, the age distribution study shows that those between 45 to 60 years account for 34.8%, while 14% cases occurred in patients below 45 years.
“It is important to note that when it comes to COVID-19, both age and co-morbidities are risk factors,” said Agarwal.
He also stated that national average of doubling time has gone up to 11 days, from 3.4 days before lockdown.
Among states, Assam, Telangana, Chhattisgarh and Himachal Pradesh have a doubling rate of over 40 days, while Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Punjab have doubling time between 10 to 20 days.
In answer to a question whether health ministry has any position on whether the national lockdown period should be extended beyond May 3, Agarwal vacillated. “Health ministry is very clear that we have to make physical distancing a part of our life, as a behaviour change. Along with that, it is equally important to focus on containment measures, in order to break the chain of transmission”.
The home ministry joint secretary Punya Salila Srivastava also was tight-lipped on whether there will be a loosening of restrictions on e-commerce in zones which have not been severely affected. “Please wait for the new orders,” she said.
She also deflected a question on the request of state governments to use the Railways to transport stranded migrants and other categories of persons. “Our order only deals with buses”.
With experimental drug Remdesivir getting good reviews in US as a possible coronavirus treatment, the health ministry official indicated that any celebrations were premature.
Also read: India’s Glenmark to Conduct Trials for Potential COVID-19 Drug
“As of now, there is no confirmed treatment protocol for COVID-19. Remdesivir is one of the various protocols which are being examined. Even the study on Remdesivir by National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, USA, has not conclusively proved the effectiveness of the drug in curing COVID-19. We are waiting for larger evidence to take meaningful action at the field level.”
On another question that certain private health centres were charging more than the prescribed limit for rapid antibody tests, Agarwal replied that the role of these tests in detecting COVID-19 infection was highly limited.
The health ministry official also said that while several candidate vaccines have been identified, “nothing conclusive has come up”.
“Multiple stages have to be passed, to conclude safe and efficacious use of a vaccine by human beings. As far as India is concerned, we have identified Hydroxychloroquine to begin with, as a prophylaxis treatment”.
India has also exported HCQ and paracetamol tablets to 87 countries on a commercial basis during this pandemic. Besides, New Delhi will also provide 2.8 million HCQ tables as grant assistance to 25 countries, while 1.9 million tables of paracetamol is to be donated to 31 countries.
