UP: COVID-19 Patient Flees From Hospital in Baghpat, Found 12 Hours Later
The man broke the window grill of the ward he was in, used his clothes and a bed sheet to make a make-shift rope, using it to climb out of the window and escape.
Representative image of an isolation ward. Flickr/CDC Global CC BY 2.0
Meerut: A 65-year-old Nepali man who had tested positive for the coronavirus infection in Baghpat, escaped at around 1 am on Tuesday morning from the hospital where he had been kept in isolation. He broke the window grill of the ward he was in, used his clothes and a bed sheet to make a make-shift rope, using it to climb out of the window and escape.
The #Covid_19 positive patient who escaped from Baghpat Quarantine facility hails from Nepal and was among 28 #Jamatis who had attended #NizamuddinMarkaz. He broke the window grille to escape. #CoronaUpdatesInIndia #coronavirusinindia #Covid_19india #covid pic.twitter.com/vOymR90Zy4
— Sandeep Rai (@RaiSandeepTOI) April 7, 2020

The hospital administration and police personnel only found out in the morning that the patient had escaped. A search operation, which included 10 teams of the administration and the Uttar Pradesh police, began to locate the man. Calls were also made to village pradhans and block officers in the area.
The Baghpat police also issued an appeal with the man’s picture to the people in the area to help find the COVID-19 patient. “He has fled while he was treating (sic). Whoever he meets will contract the life threatening coronavirus. That is why it is very important to find him and to treat him,” the appeal said.
He was finally found in a brick kiln near Baghpat at around 1 pm on Tuesday. “Our appeals to the people worked. We received a tip from a local that he has been seen around 3 kilometres from the hospital. We immediately went there and found him,” said inspector general of police (Meerut range) Praveen Kumar.
A team of the health department also accompanied the police and brought him back to the hospital. The administration has now said that it will tighten security outside all hospitals. Earlier, two patients had also fled from Azamgarh and Sultanpur in the state.
The 65-year-old who had fled in Baghpat had attended the Tablighi Jamaat meet in Delhi, according to the district administration. He was among a group of 17 who were in Rataul, close to Baghpat city, after the Tablighi Jamaat meet. They were tested on April 1 and only the 65-year-old tested positive. He was then quarantined in the Baghpat hospital.
According to Baghpat chief medical officer R.K. Tandon, the patient is so far asymptomatic. “I am surprised that he did this because he had no symptoms and he was also very well behaved. Did not give anyone any trouble before this,” he said.
Around 30% of the people who have been found to be infected with the new coronavirus in India were either at the Tablighi Jamaat event or when in contact with someone who was. The gathering which took place in Delhi between March 13 and 15 was attended by over 8,000 people
This also has to be seen in the context of sampling bias that has emerged once the Jamaat event came to light. While in most parts of the country, only those who display symptoms of COVID-19 are being tested, all those who were present at the Nizamuddin event are being tested. Thus, several patients with no symptoms – like the 65-year-old who escaped from Baghpat – are being detected, while that is not happening for the population that did not attend the Jamaat event, thereby skewing the percentage.
So far in Uttar Pradesh, 314 people have tested positive for COVID-19. Of these, 168 are linked to the Tablighi Jamaat event. According to reports, 37 of the state’s 75 districts have reported at least one infected patient and 61,500 people are under quarantine. The state has so far tested 6,073 samples, or 0.003% of its over 20 crore population.
