COVID-19: Case Count up by 3,900 in Biggest Daily Spike Reported by Health Ministry
Health ministry joint secretary Lav Agarwal said that the reason behind the sharp rise was that states had not reported data in a timely manner.
Vegetable vendors, who tested positive for COVID-19, are taken to a hospital, during ongoing lockdown in Ahmedabad, Tuesday. Photo: PTI
New Delhi: The number of COVID-19 positive patients in India rose by 3,900 in the last 24 hours, the government said in its press briefing on Tuesday. This is a sharp rise compared to the increase – 2,500 – in the number of patients that the country saw on Monday. 
The number of deaths registered on Tuesday were 195, taking the total death tally to 1,568. The total number of patients who have tested positive for COVID-19 in India has now increased to a total of 46,433. 
Over a thousand people were also discharged on Tuesday taking the total of those recovered to over 12,000. 
Tuesday’s increase is also the steepest since the beginning of the outbreak and comes six weeks into the national lockdown which began March 25.
Also read: Migrant Workers Continue Long Walks Home in Punjab, Ask for Govt Support
 The sharp increase casts doubt on a government ‘study’, one graph of which was released to the public on April 24. The graph claimed that the daily increase in the number of cases would decline to about 1,500 a day by May 5. In reality, it is almost 4,000. 
The graph had also claimed that there would be no new cases by May 16. 
Lav Agarwal, joint secretary of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, said that the reason for the sharp rise was that states have not reported data in a timely manner. “We are dealing with an infectious disease. Therefore, timely reporting of cases and their management is very important. We have noted this gap in some states. That is now being addressed after persuasion,” he said. 
Agarwal was perhaps hinting at West Bengal which registered a massive spike – of 98 deaths – on Tuesday,  taking its total death tally to 133 and a case fatality rate of over 10%. 
The state’s chief secretary Rajiva Sinha admitted that there were lapses in the reporting of data and said that this is being rectified. “We are now getting [a] real time figure. Also the issue of finding the missing data…all the missing data had been retrieved. We can give it to you every day,” he said. 
Maharashtra continues to be the state hit hardest by COVID-19 with a total number of 14,541 patients and 583 deaths. It is followed by Gujarat with 5,804 patients and 319 deaths. 
Kerala – which was among the first states to witness the outbreak – continues its impressive performance in dealing with the virus. It saw only 3 new patients and now has had a total of 503 patients, of whom 462 have been cured, while 4 – including a four month old – have died. The infection remains in only 37 patients. 
Also present at the briefing was Ministry of Home Affairs joint secretary Punya Salila Srivastava, who announced certain social distancing relaxations for weddings and funerals. “To maintain social distancing, gathering of not more than 50 people are allowed at wedding functions and not more than 20 people in the last rites of deceased persons,” she said. 
The home ministry has also said that employers must ensure thermal scanning of employees and reiterated that the Aarogya Setu app must be installed. “The offices that are operational now must ensure thermal scanning of employees. The in-charge must ensure sufficient availability of masks and sanitisers. Social distancing norms must be followed. Employees must be registered on the Aarogya Setu app and it will be the responsibility of the head of the organisation to ensure it,” Srivastava said. 
