Doctor Beaten by Police in Vizag, Had Earlier Been Suspended for Protesting PPE Shortage
The police say the doctor was "in a drunken state and behaved rudely".
The doctors hand were tied, and he can be seen in a video being dragged on the road. Photo: Video grab
New Delhi: A doctor in Visakhapatnam was dragged and beaten by the police on Thursday, reported the Hindustan Times.
In videos, Dr. K. Sudhakar can be seen shirtless, with his hands tied behind his back, being beaten by the police.
The doctor had earlier complained about the lack of Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) for doctors and been suspended last month, though the beating incident is not believed to be related to that.
Vizag police commissioner R.K. Meena has alleged that the doctor was under the influence of alcohol and had misbehaved with the police. “Sudhakar was in a drunken state and he behaved rudely with the police. He snatched the mobile phone from a constable and threw it away. The doctor is apparently suffering from some psychological problems,” Meena said, according to the Hindustan Times.
Meena also said that Sudhakar has now been sent for medical examination, after which a case will be brought against the doctor.
Also read: Fake WhatsApp Videos Behind Attack on Health Workers in Indore: Report
A report in the Mumbai Mirror says that Sudhakar was taken to the King George hospital for medical examination. “Dr Sudhakar was brought to the KGH casualty ward at 6.30 pm. From the smell, it was found that he was in a drunk condition. Under the influence of alcohol, he did not cooperate with anybody there and kept abusing all. Still, his pulse, BP were checked. Pulse was 98, BP 140/100. Blood samples were sent to forensic lab to ascertain alcohol content in his blood,” the hospital said in a statement.
According to The News Minute, the police commissioner also said that the police constable who can be seen beating Sudhakar has been suspended.
Sudhakar had been suspended last month by the Andhra Pradesh government after having complained about the lack of adequate number of PPEs. “We are asked to use the same mask for 15 days before asking for a fresh mask. How can we treat patients risking our lives?” he had asked in a video.
He worked as an anaesthesiologist at Narsipatnam government hospital and had been suspended by the government following his comments.
Note: The headline of this story has been changed to avoid giving the mistaken impression that the doctor’s complaint over PPE shortages was the reason for the police beating him. Based on what is known, the two incidents are, in fact, quite unrelated.
