China Has Approved 35 Cargo Flights for Supply of Medical Items: Chinese Envoy
India has been looking at China as the main procurement destination for medical supplies.
Photo: Reuters/P. Ravikumar
New Delhi: China has approved 35 Indian cargo flights through a fast-track process to carry medical devices and items required for protection and treatment of patients during the coronavirus pandemic, the Chinese ambassador to India said on Friday.
On his official Twitter account, Chinese envoy Sun Weidong posted that China had opened a green channel for Indian air cargo flights to bring back supplies like personal protection equipment kits, ventilators and testing kits. He stated that China had approved 35 flights from India through the newly-opened “green channel”.
चीन ने महामारी के दौरान भारतीय एयर कार्गो परिवहन के लिए “ग्रीन चैनल” खोला है और भारत की जरूरत में आप के यहां आनेवाले 35 कार्गो उड़ानों की मंजूरी दी है जिसमें पीपीई, वेंटिलेटर और परीक्षण किट जैसी चिकित्सा आपूर्तियां हैं।हम कोविद-19 के खिलाफ लड़ रहे भारत का समर्थन करना जारी रखें।
— Sun Weidong (@China_Amb_India) April 24, 2020

The ‘green channel’ is a fast-track process set up by the Civil Aviation Administration for China (CAAC) to give clearance for international cargo flights to transport emergency medical supplies. India is, of course, not the only country which has been sending cargo flights to China, with nearly all countries facing a shortage of medical equipment during this period.
A day earlier, Indian ministry of external affairs spokesperson Anurag Srivastava had said that in the past two weeks, around two dozen flights from five cities in China carried 400 tonnes of medical supplies, including RT-PCR test kits, Rapid Antibody Tests, PPE kits and digital thermometers. “Around 20 more flights are expected to bring supplies from China in the coming days,” he said on Thursday.
Also read: Coronavirus: China Ready to Share Experience to Control Spread With India
India has been looking at China as the main procurement destination for medical supplies, with the Indian envoy also urging for a stable and predictable supply chain.
The tweet of the Chinese ambassador comes in the background of reports about the Indian Council of Medical Research expressing concern about the accuracy of results of rapid antibody tests. This had led to ICMR pausing the usage of the kits for two days.
Noticed reports concerning rapid testing kits. #China attaches great importance to the quality of exported medical products. Will keep close communication with #Indian concerned agency and provide necessary assistance.
— Ji Rong (@ChinaSpox_India) April 21, 2020

Chinese embassy spokesperson Ji Rong had also responded that it was ready to assist ICMR in its investigation.
However, a government source on Wednesday tried to put a lid on the controversy by saying that ICMR had not yet made a call on the efficacy of the kits. “They produce certain results under certain conditions. So, they are yet to judge results,” he said.
The two private Chinese firms, Wondfo Biotech and Livzon Diagnostics, had also issued separate statements on Thursday, expressing shock at the allegations by ICMR. They also indicated that if there was any discrepancy in the results, it was probably in the way that the kits were being used.
