4,600+ Jurists, Scholars, Actors, Artists, Writers Condemn UP Police's Charges Against The Wire
The signatories include T.M. Krishna, Mallika Sarabhai, Farhan Akhtar, Justice Madan B. Lokur.
The signatories include (from top left) Justice Madan B. Lokur, Shivshankar Menon, Anita Desai, Jim Spigelman, Sujatha Singh, Farhan Akhtar, Bianca Jagger and Romila Thapar.
Note: This article was first published on April 15, 2020 and is being republished on April 18, 2020 as the number of signatories increased.
New Delhi: More than 4,600 jurists, academics, actors, artists, writers and people from all walks of life have endorsed a statement expressing shock at the action of the Uttar Pradesh government and police under Yogi Adityanath in filing criminal charges against The Wire and one of its founding editors, Siddharth Varadarajan, for an entirely factual story on COVID-19 and religious events. 
The statement has called it, “a direct attack on freedom of the media.” 
The signatories called upon the government of Uttar Pradesh to withdraw the FIR against Varadarajan and The Wire, and drop all criminal proceedings. 
They also urged the government of India and all state governments not to use the pandemic as a cover to trample upon media freedom. “A medical emergency should not serve as the pretext for the imposition of a de facto political emergency,” the statement said.
The signatories also called upon the Indian media to not communalise the pandemic.
The signatories include Justice Madan B. Lokur, former judge of the Supreme Court, Jim Spigelman AC QC, a former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of New South Wales and a former chairman of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, Justice K. Chandru, former judge of the Madras high court, and Justice Anjana Prakash, former judge of the Patna high court. 
Also read: UP Police Serve Notice on The Wire, Summon Founding Editor to Ayodhya Despite Lockdown
Two former Chiefs of Naval Staff, Admiral Ramdas, and Admiral Vishnu Bhagwat have also signed, along with Yashwant Sinha, former external affairs and finance minister of India. 
Several former bureaucrats are signatories including Shivshankar Menon, former foreign secretary and former National Security Adviser, Julio Ribeiro, former Adviser to Governor of Punjab and former Ambassador to Romania, M.S. Gill, former CEC, Narendra Sisodia, former Secretary, Ministry of Finance, GoI, Anand Arni and Vappala Balachandran (both former Special Secretaries, RAW) and Sujatha Singh, former Foreign Secretary. 
Vikram Seth, Nayantara Sahgal, Arundhati Roy, Anita Desai, K. Satchidanandan, Kiran Desai, S. Raghunandana are among the writers who have signed. 
The statement has also been endorsed by actors and artistes such as Rabbi Shergill, Amol Palekar, Naseeruddin Shah, Nandita Das, Farhan Akhtar, T.M. Krishna and Mallika Sarabhai. The sculptor Sir Anish Kapoor, and artists Atul Dodia, Rekha Rodwittiya, Vivan Sundaram, Arpita Singh, and Paramjit Singh are those who have signed. Zoya Akhtar, Kiran Rao and Anand Patwardhan among the film-makers, and Dayanita Singh, Nikhil Roshan and Gauri Gill among the photographers. 
Several journalists have also joined the demand for media freedom including Alan Rusbridger, former editor of The Guardian, Manoj Joshi, formerly of The Times of India, and Bharat Bhushan and Nicholas Dawes, formerly of the Hindustan Times, Amit Baruah, resident editor of The Hindu, and Seema Chishti, senior editor of the Indian Express.
Other signatories include C.U. Singh, senior advocate at the Supreme Court, AGK Menon, architect and town planner, Shanta Sinha, former head of the NCPCR, and public figures like Devaki Jain, Medha Patkar, Sandeep Pandey, Swami Agnivesh, Aruna Roy and Yogendra Yadav. 
Also read: ‘Charges Smack of Vindictiveness’: Journalists’ Union Condemns FIRs Against The Wire
Over a thousand professors from universities across the globe, across disciplines from Sanskrit, Mathematics, Astrophysics, History, Anthropology etc., have signed, including Naresh Dadhich of IUCAA, T.R. Govindarajan of the Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Chennai, V. Vasanthi Devi, Former Vice-Chancellor, MS University, Sheldon Pollock of Columbia University, Kaushik Basu and Alaka Basu of Cornell University, Arjun Appadurai of NYU, Ganesh Devy, Ramachandra Guha, David Shulman of Hebrew University, Jan Breman of Leiden, Pranab Bardhan of UC Berkeley, Romila Thapar of JNU, Prasanjit Duara of Duke University, Veena Das of Johns Hopkins University, Partha Chatterjee of CSSS Calcutta, Jean Dreze, Homi Bhabha, to name just a fraction of the eminent academic signatories. 
Bianca Jagger has signed on behalf of the Bianca Jagger Human Rights Foundation, and Rachel Jolley on behalf of Index on Censorship among other organisations.  
Finally, thousands of concerned citizens and individuals from across India and abroad have endorsed these demands, asking for an end to curbs on media freedom, no communal reporting and the quashing of the charges against Siddharth Varadarajan and The Wire. 
A copy of the statement is below:
We, the undersigned, are shocked at the action of the UP police under Yogi Adityanath in filing criminal charges against The Wire and against one of its founding editors, Siddharth Varadarajan. This attack on media freedom, especially during the Covid-19 crisis, endangers not just free speech, but the public’s right to information. 
The target of this action is a factual story on the Tablighi Jamaat and its exposure to Covid-19. Towards the end, the impugned article merely pointed out that “Indian believers” more generally have been late to adopt precautions and avoid congregation, recalling UP Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath’s plans, as late as March 18, to proceed with a religious fair at Ayodhya and his flouting of the national lockdown and social distancing norms by taking part in a religious ceremony along with others on March 25.
Two FIRs were filed under various sections of the law on April 1, one on a complaint by a resident of Ayodhya and the other on the basis of a complaint by the SHO of the Kotwali Nagar police station, Faizabad. A plain reading of the sections invoked in the FIRs (given below) makes it clear they cannot possibly apply to the article in question. The FIRs were followed up with a gross display of intimidation on April 10 when policemen arrived in a black SUV with no numberplates at Varadarajan’s residence in Delhi to issue a legal notice ordering him to appear in Ayodhya on April 14 at 10 am. 
That the UP government sent policemen driving across 700 kilometres during the national lockdown to issue this summons when the postal system is still operational speaks volumes for its priorities. 
The Wire, along  with other independent media and journalists, has been courageous and consistent in continuing to present the facts. The UP police action is just the latest in a series of attempts by the ruling establishment, or persons close to them, to entangle The Wire and its editors in legal cases in an effort to shut them down.
The police action against The Wire also comes against the backdrop of the demonization of Muslims in a section of the media as being responsible for the spread of the novel coronavirus in India. On April 6, the WHO felt the need to reiterate the principle that media should avoid religious or other profiling of COVID-19 cases. 
We, the undersigned, 
List of Signatories (in alphabetical order upto 2 pm, April 14). Full list available here.
