Seven Migrant Workers Self-Isolate on Mango, Banyan Trees Outside Bengal Village
The seven youth, who returned to Purulia district from Chennai, have tied cots and plastic sheets on the tree and are only climbing down to use the toilet and receive food. 
Photo: Twitter
New Delhi: Seven migrant labourers hailing from the Purulia district of West Bengal have been quarantined atop three trees since they arrived in their village on March 25 from Chennai.
According to news reports, the labourers – between 22 and 24 years of age – reached Kharagpur by train from Chennai this past March 22. They then boarded a bus to arrive at Purulia and thereafter hopped on to a vehicle to reach Balarampur. Reports quoting the labourers said they contacted the local police station due to the scare over COVID-19 before heading off to their village. The local police directed them to the hospital where the doctors suggested they quarantine themselves at home for 14 days.
“When we were about to enter the village, the villagers stopped us. They said they did not want to take any chances and made arrangements on a mango tree outside the village,” Bimal Singh Sardar, one of the labourers, told The Sunday Express. “We have small rooms and proper isolation is not possible there. We have made proper arrangements on the tree and are providing them everything they need,” said a villager.
Also read: Ground Report: Chaos at Anand Vihar as Buses Prepare to Take Migrant Workers Home
The New Indian Express wrote that the seven youth have quarantined themselves on three trees – one banyan and two mango. Balarampur block development officer Dhrubapada Shandilya also told the New Indian Express that “no praise was enough for the seven”.
“We are thinking how the local administration can help them out,” he said.
Each cot tied to the tree branches has a plastic sheet over them to protect the youth from rain. They are allowed to climb down the tree only to go to toilet and receive food. Arrangements have been made to supply them with water to wash their utensils and clothes daily.
The report said that “villagers keep a watch on the youths round the clock” so that they don’t come in contact with the rest of the residents.
“Now we are on our own, we will be staying in here comfortably maintaining all rules,” Bijoy Singh Laya, one of the migrant labourers told the Times of India.
