As COVID-19 Death Toll Crosses 1,000, Govt Says Doubling Rate Has Slowed Further
With the second phase of the lockdown about to end on May 3, some states have announced extensions, post-lockdown plans and other rules to be followed.
Medics pose for photographs as PTI photojournalist Kunal Patil prepares to leave a hospital after his COVID-19 treatment. Photo: Kunal Patil/PTI
New Delhi: With just four days to go before the end of phase 2 of the COVID-19 related lockdown, the death toll due to the novel coronavirus crossed 1,000 today. While the health ministry claimed the doubling rate has dropped sharply, several of the states have launched their own schemes and measures to curb the spread of the virus even after the restrictions are relaxed.
71 deaths in last 24 hours
The health ministry said with 1,813 new COVID-19 positive cases and 71 deaths in the past 24 hours, the total number of cases across the country has gone up to 31,787 while 1,008 people have lost their lives to the dreaded virus. The ministry also disclosed that apart from the deceased, there were 22,982 active cases while 7,797 have been cured or discharged and one had migrated.
On the condition of serious patients, the minister said while 0.33% patients were on ventilators, 1.5% patients were on oxygen support and 2.34% patients were in ICU. He said this showed the level of medical care that was being provided.
60,000 samples being tested per day
Health minister Harsh Vardhan said the total testing capacity for the coronavirus would be increased to 1 lakh per day soon. He said 288 government labs and 97 private lab chains with around 16,000 sample collection centres were operational around the country and together they were testing around 60,000 samples per day.
Vardhan expressed some satisfaction with the way India has been able to keep the total number of cases and deaths low. He said that over the last three days, the doubling rate of COVID-19 cases in the country has gone up to 11.3 days. “Although the global mortality rate is around 7%, India has a current mortality rate of around 3% and around 86% of fatality of persons with co-morbidity,” he added.
Also read: Holding Hunger at Bay During Lockdown: Stories From Bengaluru and the Nilgiris
Home ministry issues circular to facilitate return of stranded people to their homes
Meanwhile, the Union home ministry today relaxed the norms for travel of stranded migrant workers, tourists, students and others to facilitate their return home. With the lockdown into its 36th day, many of them have been struggling to survive in the places where they were when the restrictions on movement came into force.
Migrant workers from Akola district in Maharashtra walk along the Mumbai-Nashik highway, in Thane, April 29, 2020. Photo: PTI/Mitesh Bhuvad
To facilitate the return of such workers and their families, the home ministry has issued a circular whereby it has urged state governments to appoint nodal officers for providing travel access to the stranded persons. The circular also states that all those seeking to return home would be screened for COVID-19 and would only be allowed to proceed if they do not show any symptoms.
Also read: Three Lessons from Past Epidemics that Will Help India Fight COVID-19
Punjab extends lockdown by two weeks
In Punjab, chief minister Amarinder Singh today declared that the lockdown would be extended by two weeks till May 17. In a video message, Singh said an extension was still needed. Incidentally, the Congress CM had similarly announced an extension of the first phase of lockdown by three weeks till April end four days before Prime Minister Narendra Modi had announced the second phase of nationwide restrictions.
During the extended lockdown, Singh said daily relaxation to the curfew would be allowed for four hours from 7 am to 11 am in non-red and non-containment zones.
West Bengal announces post-lockdown plan
In West Bengal, chief minister Mamata Banerjee announced a post-lockdown exit plan that would come into force from May 4. Under this, while some economic activities and travel would be allowed within green and orange zones, there would be no relaxation within the red zones.
Health workers wearing protective suits in Kolkata, April 29, 2020. Photo: PTI
The exit plan also lays down that no crowding in front of shops and on roads would be allowed; in green zones only small shops would be allowed to open outside market complexes and private buses would be allowed to ply. Also in buses, only 20 passengers will be permitted. The state would allow book shops, hardware, stationary, paint shops and laundry to open and doctors to run their clinics.
Also read: Will Bluetooth and Aarogya Setu Allow Us to Safely Exit the COVID-19 Lockdown?
In Kerala, the Pinarayi Vijayan-led Left Democratic Front government has made wearing masks compulsory in public and workplaces from Thursday. The state government has threatened to impose a fine of Rs 200 for the first offence and of Rs 5,000 for subsequent offences. It has clarified that cloth masks, towels and handkerchiefs would also be allowed for covering of faces.
In Tamil Nadu, the Chennai Corporation has intensified its sanitation programmes in the containment zones. It has taken to use of electrostatic spray machines, jet engine spraying machines and tractor trailer spraying machines to widen and strengthen the programme.
