Centre Claims Increase in Cases 'Linear, Not Exponential', Highlights 19.89% Recovery Rate
'We have been able to cut virus transmission and minimised spread of COVID-19 in the 30 days of lockdown.'
 A medic works on samples collected from media professionals for COVID-19 tests, at a special testing centre set up by the Delhi government, during the nationwide lockdown to curb the spread of coronavirus, at Patel Nagar in New Delhi, Thursday, April 23, 2020. Photo: PTI
New Delhi: The total number of coronavirus cases across India has reached 21,700 while the death toll has gone up to 686, the Centre said on Thursday while adding that it has been able to “cut coronavirus transmission”.
During a briefing, joint secretary in the Ministry of Health Luv Agarwal said the number of districts which have not reported any case during the past 28 days has risen. “As of today, we have 12 districts that did not have a fresh case in the last 28 days or more. There are now 78 districts (23 states and Union Territories) that have not reported any fresh cases during the last 14 days,” he pointed out.
He added that the increase in the number of cases was “more or less linear, not exponential”.
Also read: Coronavirus Daily Updates: India’s Case Count Rises to 21,700
Incidentally, the count of districts which have not reported any new case over the past 28 days was four till April 21. Since then, the districts of Chitradurga (Karnataka), Bilaspur (Chhattisgarh), Imphal West (Manipur), Aizawl West (Mizoram), Bhadradari Kothagudem (Telangana), Pilibhit (Uttar Pradesh), SBS Nagar (Punjab) and South Goa (Goa) have got added to this list.
Among the states, it was informed that Maharashtra had the highest incidence of COVID-19 cases with a total of 5,652 positive patients and 269 deaths. The ministry also stated that 77 foreign nationals have also been affected by the virus in the country. The second most cases have been witnessed in Gujarat (2,407 cases and 103 deaths) followed by Delhi (with 2,248 positive patients and 48 deaths).
The other states where people have died due to the novel coronavirus are Madhya Pradesh (81), Telangana (24), Andhra Pradesh (27), Uttar Pradesh (21), Punjab (16), Karnataka (17), Tamil Nadu (18), Rajasthan (27), West Bengal (15), Jammu and Kashmir (5), Kerala (3), Jharkhand (3), Haryana (3), Bihar (2) and Meghalaya, Odisha, Assam and Himachal Pradesh with one death each.
Agarwal also disclosed that as per Health Ministry data, the recovery rate was 19.89%. With 4,324 people having been cured or discharged, he said:
“We have been able to cut virus transmission and minimise the spread of COVID-19 in 30 days of lockdown.”
The Health Ministry said the number of COVID-19 hospitals has increased 3.5 times over the last month while the number of isolation beds rose by 3.6 times during the period.
Speaking on behalf of the Ministry of Home Affairs, joint secretary Punya Salila Srivastava said the exemption list for lockdown restrictions has been expanded to cover in-house caregivers of senior citizens, prepaid mobile recharge utilities and food processing units in urban areas.
On the emphasis on testing for COVID-19, Environment Secretary and Chairman of Empowered Group-2 C.K. Mishra said:
“On March 23, we had done 14,915 tests across the country and on April 22 we have done more than 5 lakh tests. If a rough calculation is done, it is about 33 times in 30 days.”
He added that this was not enough and that there was a need to ramp up testing.
Number of dedicated #COVIDHospitals has increased by 3.5 times and number of isolation beds by 3.6 times during the last one-month lockdown period – Chairman, Empowered Group 2, highlighting the preparedness the nation has been taking as #IndiaFightsCorona pic.twitter.com/80poIZPVQi
— PIB India #StayHome #StaySafe (@PIB_India) April 23, 2020

It was also stated that for the third time since the imposition of the lockdown last month, Prime Minister Narendra Modi will interact with all the chief ministers through video conferencing on Monday. The meeting is likely to take up the issue of additional financial assistance to the states from the Centre for fighting the pandemic.
Meanwhile, the government has also decided to not implement the approval of a 4% hike in dearness allowance for the Central government employees which was cleared by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs in March this year.
The decision has been taken to avoid additional burden on the exchequer. As per the CCEA decision, the DA was to be raised from 17% to 21%. Around 49.26 lakh serving government employees and 61.17 lakh pensioners have been  impacted by the change of plan.
The Centre, it was announced, has also promulgated the ordinance to amend the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 in the wake of the pandemic to provide protection to healthcare workers. The Epidemic Disease (Act) Ordinance 2020 states that “no person shall indulge in any act of violence against healthcare service personnel or cause any loss or damage to any property during the epidemic”.
The amendment provides makes such acts of violence cognisable and non-bailable offences. It also makes stringent provision of punishment with for a term of three months to five years, and with fine of Rs 50,000 to Rs 2,00,000 in case of an offence.
In the event of a health worker sustaining grievous hurt, the imprisonment would be for a term of six months to seven years while the fine amount would range between Rs 1 lakh and Rs 5 lakh. Also, the offenders, under the law, would be liable to pay compensation to the victim and twice the fair market value for damage of property or the loss caused, as the court may determine.
