Connectivity Is Imperative in the Battle Against Coronavirus
The immediate need right now is that information about COVID-19 must reach every nook and corner for which 4G internet services are desperately needed.
A man walks inside a deserted shopping mall after restrictions are placed in Srinagar over rising concerns over the coronavirus pandemic on March 19, 2020. Photo: PTI/S. Irfan
Srinagar: Following the identification of one confirmed case of COVID-19 in Srinagar, the Doctors Association, Kashmir (DAK) advised people to avoid hospital visits for minor and mild ailments. The association also established a COVID-19 online helpline to assess patients online or via telephone to decrease overcrowding in hospitals. As hospitals can easily emerge as an epicentre for highly virulent and fatal communicable diseases at these times, it is therefore the utmost responsibility of society to avoid hospital visits as much as possible.
We are of the considered opinion that if just 10% of consultations could get digital, there would be 10,000 fewer face-to-face hospital visits per day. That, in turn, is going to be a major factor in containing COVID-19 transmission.
To save the public from this pandemic, it is essential to educate them about the virus, its mode of transmission and methods of prevention – in their local languages. Because at the end of the day, it is the people of any nation and their discipline which can curtail and contain the spread of COVID-19.
The immediate need right now is that information about COVID-19 must reach every nook and corner. My doctors and paramedics are ready, but we desperately need 4G internet services. With 2G, which is all we currently have, we cannot upload video messages and subsequently people are unable to download and view them without buffering.
To mitigate risk further, a potentially suspected COVID-19 patient can be also assessed by online video assessment and accordingly be advised to self-isolate, go through testing or visit a hospital. These are standard practices being implemented by countries around the world that are proving very effective.
Also read: Kashmiri Doctors’ Body Appeals for Protective Gear, Masks, Ventilators
If any state is grabbed by a highly infectious communicable disease with a symptom spectrum ranging from mild nasal congestion to difficulty in breathing, then every patient developing respiratory symptoms simply cannot rush to hospitals and trigger a nation into panic. The overall damage, destruction and devastation caused by such panic will be a hundred times more than that done by COVID-19 per se. Therefore, it is mandatory for people to stay calm and disciplined during such trying times.
Historically, given its troubled history, Kashmir is famous for rumour mongering and it is therefore incumbent on medical doctors to combat rumours scientifically.
And it is the utmost responsibility of the government to consider restoration of high-speed internet services after proper assessment of political and security scenario in the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir.
In a significant policy change, NHS bosses in England directed their 7,000 general physicians to start conducting as many remote consultations as soon as possible, replacing patient visits with contact via phone, video, online or text.
People buy protective masks in wake of coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, in Srinagar, Thursday, March 19, 2020.
In light of the request from NHS England, the Digital Healthcare Council is now ready to support all digital health companies providing online NHS consultations to patients across the country to make sure patients are seen by a medical professional as quickly and safely as possible.
Our engineers from Kashmir have also showed willingness to create a health website for doctors to help us access, classify and manage large numbers of patients but, again, slow internet is the biggest hurdle for the launch and maintenance of such an initiative.
In the past few weeks, online services have risen significantly in many countries, as people are eager to seek medical advice without wanting to go to a hospital.
Also read: Families Demand Release of Kashmiri Detainees Over Coronavirus Risks
One service, Médaviz – which allows you to contact your usual general practitioners via video call – has had a 150% rise in registrations by doctors on its platform each week since COVID-19 hit; while the number of consultations with patients has more than doubled.
Another service, MesDocteurs, has said that since the beginning of February, its numbers have also risen significantly. Marie-Laure Saillard, director-general of MesDocteurs, said: “Teleconsultations have risen by more than 40%.”
The move is likely to prove controversial because it will mean that many patients are unable to have a physical examination, risking that some symptoms go undetected.
The Royal College of GPs made clear that patients who still want to see a general practitioner should be able to do so. But NHS England has started asking health technology firms such as PushDoctor, Babylon, Docly and Visiba to help surgeries put in place the equipment needed for a massive expansion in remote consultations.
To keep continuous vigil on COVID-19 and to remain abreast with WHO and national guidelines high-speed internet is the basic need of the hour.
In his televised address to the nation on March 19, Prime Minister Narendra Modi asked people for their cooperation to tackle the pandemic and urged them to follow their responsibilities. Every Indian should be vigilant and  avoid stepping out of their homes unless absolutely essential. Those over the age of 60 should remain inside their homes. He stressed that the nation should dutifully observe a ‘Janata Curfew’ (People’s Curfew) on Sunday, March 22 from 7 am to  9 pm.
Also read: ‘An Hour to Download ICU Guidelines’: Amid COVID-19, Kashmir Doctors Struggle With Slow Internet
The prime minister also asked people to express gratitude to those working round the clock to keep India healthy (including doctors, nurses, paramedics, municipal staff, armed forces, airport staff).
But we doctors will be thankful to the Prime Minister if 4G internet services are restored in Valley.
Dr Suhail Naik was born in the hilly town of Shopian in South Kashmir and is a senior consultant paediatrician, academician and is presently working in department of health and medical education Jammu and Kashmir. He is chief of the Doctors Association, Kashmir and is also a health columnist.
This article was originally published on the International Federation of Journalists.
