Mumbai: Doctor Sexually Assaults Male COVID-19 Patient, Put in Home Quarantine
The alleged assault took place on the doctor's first day at the hospital.
A view of Wockhardt Hopsital in Mumbai. Photo: Wockhardthospitals.com
New Delhi: In Mumbai’s Wockhardt hospital, a 44-year-old male COVID-19 patient has been allegedly sexually assaulted by a newly-appointed doctor on May 1.
An FIR has been registered in the matter, based upon the complaint of the hospital authorities, under Sections 377 (unnatural offences), 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of diseases endangering life) and 270 (malignant act likely to spread infection of diseases endangering life) of the Indian Penal Code.
“We have registered the case on the basis of what the HR manager has said in his statement. He told us that the accused was interviewed on April 28 and 29 following which he was hired by the hospital, and April 30 was his first day at work. He committed the offence on the second day,” a police officer told the Indian Express.
According to senior police inspector Savlaram Agwane of Agripada station, the accused has not been arrested or interrogated so far. Fearing he might also be infected with COVID-19, the police has placed the accused doctor under home quarantine in his apartment in Thane.
Also read: Husband Used COVID-19 to Harass Me, Says Estranged Wife
The accused is an MD who pursued his medical education at a Navi Mumbai medical college.
He was appointed under a policy decision to let doctors above 60 years of age and with co-morbidities stay at home, and instead recruit young doctors. On April 30, the accused was recruited by the hospital. The COVID-19 patient was also admitted on the same day. The alleged act took place on May 1, around 9:30 am.
In the complaint, it has been stated that the accused entered the ICU ward where the patient was admitted and made physical advances despite resistance from the patient’s side. “The patient raised an alarm when the doctor assaulted him and staffers who were stationed outside went inside the room,” an officer told the Indian Express.
In a statement issued on Sunday, the hospital said that the accused has been terminated. “The doctor was on his first day of duty, having joined the previous day. Following the receipt of information of misconduct and as per protocol, the administration immediately informed the police. The services of the doctor were terminated.”
Wockhardt hospital was sealed after 80 staffers were infected with COVID-19. It reopened on April 23.
