Government Portal Says 769 Foreign Tourists Are 'Stranded in India'
The Ministry of Tourism is giving these tourists a chance to reach out online with any issues they may be facing.
A police officer speaks to foreign tourists in Patna. Photo: PTI
New Delhi: The “stranded in India” portal launched by the Union tourism ministry on March 31 to identify, assist and facilitate foreign tourists stranded across India due to the COVID-19 lockdown, has received about 769 registrations in the first five days.
Every state government and union territory administration has assigned a nodal officer, and five regional officers of the tourism ministry are constantly coordinating with the nodal officers for assisting foreign tourists registered on the portal.
These include visa issues faced by the foreigner, requests to move within the country, and so on.
“The tourism ministry’s regional offices are also coordinating with the Bureau of Immigration and FRROs (foreigner regional registration offices) regarding visa issues being faced by stranded foreigners. Requests for movement within the country/ state and for transfer to home country of such tourists are also being coordinated with the ministry of external affairs, ministry of home affairs and with the respective embassy/high commission/consulate,” said a statement.
The statement adds that stranded foreign tourists who contact the authorities over email, telephone or in person are connected with the relevant foreign office of their home country in India and provided updates on flights out of India to their home countries.
Medical assistance, food and accommodation have also been provided.
Watch: ‘I Had COVID-19, and Survived. But There Were Times I Was Scared.’
A US citizen who was stranded in Bihar’s Supaul district registered herself on the portal and it helped her secure a special transit-permit to travel to Delhi, where her son was undergoing a surgery.
Similarly, two Costa Rican citizens were stranded in Chennai after their surgeries there. Through the portal, the administration was able to coordinate with the Costa Rican embassy and the hotel where the two were staying, and finally reach out to them.
An Australian tourist, along with his family, was stranded in Ahmedabad. He had ran out of his epilepsy medication. However, with the help of the portal, the office of the district collector was able to reach out to the tourist.
