In a Virtual Courtroom, Signs of Long-Awaited Change
Under lockdown, India's courts and advocates have embraced technology. With it comes a less combative, less hierarchical judicial environment. 
Disinfectant being sprayed at the Calcutta high court during the lockdown. Photo: PTI
Black gowns and bands lie unworn. Our courts and tribunals, famed for being in a constant frenzy (during working hours) now hear only distant, intermittent footsteps. Lawyers, most of whom take great pleasure in being busy – or at least seeming busy – are grottoed away. Mounds of legal energy remain unspent without the daily ration of courtroom drama, as the lockdown wears on.
At the same time, systems of justice delivery are resilient and adapting to the needs of our unfamiliar present. Most, if not all, courts in the country have issued directions to ensure that only the most urgent and exigent cases are listed for hearing. They have made provisions to hear those cases via video-conferencing. Pleadings are being accepted in a paperless format.
Recently, I had the good fortune of appearing via video-conference before the chief justice’s bench in the Karnataka high court. We sought an intervention in a proceeding initiated by the court, related to relief efforts undertaken by state authorities during the lockdown. Many public interest petitions had been filed, and the court decided to hear them together.
All the advocates were directed to be present before the court through our computers at an appointed hour. Younglings like myself appeared alongside more senior members, in tiny windows on our screens, everyone similarly unsure of the protocol to follow.
When the justices emerged in their own little box, many of us rose from our seats (as is customary), only to be told bashfully that we need not stand up in our own homes. Muted chuckles and gentle smiles populated the monitor, disarming us all.
Also read: Objection Raised Over UP HC Judge’s Call to Senior Lawyers to Donate Rs 50,000 a Month
So many aspects of court proceeding are inherently physical. The rising and sitting of lawyers, vigorous gesturing by the arguing counsel, even the arching of the justices toward each other to confer midway through a hearing. All these corporeal gestures contribute subtly to the decision-making process, and to the atmosphere of a courtroom. We didn’t realise what their loss entailed till we experienced it for ourselves. It is a marked difference.
There is, and I say this gingerly, an easing of temperaments. Indian lawyers relish the adversarial process and the opportunities for confrontation it throws up. With less physicality on display – or rather the impact of this physicality tempered by screens – it may be that we turn lesser toward combative argumentation.
This was exemplified in the hearings before the Karnataka high court. Each of the advocates made pointed claims about a specific relief measure that was failing in its objective, or about a practical difficulty in effecting a measure. The state responded where it could, accepted responsibility where it had to, and brought relevant information for the court’s consideration. Adjudication became an exercise aimed single-mindedly at resolution; guided by common sense and unhindered by technical minutiae.
As advocates and judges fumbled (ever so slightly) through this new virtual landscape, so much that was superfluous was discarded. No lofty rhetoric, no winding soliloquies – just the necessary facts and the applicable law.
Four such hearings have taken place since, and the court has passed extensive orders on issues as crucial as decongesting prisons, supplying food to migrant labourers and other transient groups, providing protective gear to health workers, and ensuring compliance with guidelines on social distancing. In doing so, the court is not so much monitoring the state’s efforts at managing the pandemic, as it is ensuring that the rights of all are adequately protected. It is reaffirming that our foundational values not be discarded even in times of severe distress.
Also read: The Legal Charter of PM CARES is Unsound, the Government Must Frame Rules At Once
In four hearings, no longer than a couple of hours each, a reasoned and well-intentioned deliberation has brought to the state’s attention the needs of so many it had left unaddressed.
In our zeal to find the new normal, we are now embracing available technology in a hurry. A pandemic ought not to be necessary for us to see the value in paperless courts or remotely-conducted proceedings, yet here we are. In a post-pandemic world, privatised and publicly-funded dispute resolution become subject to new constraints. As a corollary, these systems will also be afforded newer freedoms. It is a brave new time for the law, and for lawyers and judges. How we respond to questions of justice that emerge in our uncertain present could set the tone for justice delivery for the indefinite future.
Being stuck together in a state of quarantine may have prompted a more purposeful approach to litigation: a sense of the collective outweighing individual instincts to push, pull and drag. This gives us so much to take away. That our justice delivery mechanisms can be effective and swift, even in times like these, is a stern reminder about the times we allow them to become sluggish and prone to iniquity. A reminder that we cannot lose in times of prosperity the spirit of duty that binds us now.
Rohan Kothari is an advocate based in Bangalore.
