Only 3% of Migrants Returning to Uttar Pradesh Have Tested Positive for COVID-19
This suggests that the government could have safely arranged for workers' transport back home at the beginning of the lockdown.
Passengers on a UP Roadways bus after services were resumed. Photo: PTI
New Delhi: Only 3% of the tested samples of migrant labourers reaching Uttar Pradesh have come back positive of COVID-19. For the last two months, migrants have been returning to various states breaking the Centre’s lockdown regulations, and the highest exodus reportedly has been to Uttar Pradesh.
The data on the confirmed cases amongst the returnees in Uttar Pradesh – conducted by Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme – has largely remained the same, as per an Indian Express report.
It said that according to the data, “Currently, as many as 11.96 lakh migrants who have returned to the state are under surveillance. Of them, 74,237 migrants have been tested positive for the infection and 2,404 have turned positive – a positivity rate of 3.2 per cent. Over the last 10 days, the average 3 per cent of the total migrant samples tested.”
Also read: Punjab: Labour Shortage in Lockdown Reveals Fissures in Farm Economy Ahead of Paddy Sowing Season
This data suggests that UP has not seen a spike in numbers with the arrival of migrants in large numbers. It also indicates that the migrant labourers were perhaps not much exposed to the novel coronavirus at the beginning of the lockdown and the Centre could have facilitated transport for those willing to return home before announcing the lockdown or during the first phase itself.
However, the Centre facilitated the movement of migrant labourers – and others stranded – only staring from the third phase of the lockdown, including from states which have been reporting a high number of cases by then. News reports coming from the Northeast on a continuous spike in cases of COVID-19 only after the arrival of people from Delhi, Mumbai, Bangalore and Chennai, indicates that they were exposed to the virus during their protracted stay in these cities. However, it is yet to be ascertained how many of the affected returnees in the Northeastern states were migrant labourers and not exposed to foreign travellers or their secondary or tertiary contacts.
In UP too, the return of the migrant labourers led to spread of the virus in 75 districts of the state, but the Indian Express news report pointed out that the positivity rate in the tested migrants in UP “is almost 2 percentage point lower than the country’s positivity rate; and in stark contrast to the positivity rate in Maharashtra (15 per cent), Gujarat (8 per cent) and Delhi (9 per cent), states from where most of the migrants have returned.”
Also read: As Odisha Struggles to Deal With Rapid COVID-19 Spread, Migrant Workers Demand More Testing
K. Srinath Reddy, president of the Public Health Foundation of India and a member of the high-level committee of public experts for COVID-19, told the newspaper that they had a very low exposure to the virus because of the kind of jobs they do and the places where they live.
“I have been saying from the beginning that the migrants did not pose a threat. They should have been assisted in being sent back right at the beginning of the lockdown. The reasons are that, basically, people who brought in the virus are foreign travellers. They spread the virus and their primary contacts were the people who secondarily spread the virus,” he said.
