Healthcare Personnel, Public Health Activists Pen Letter for All Indians on COVID-19
'Planning for COVID-19 should not be at the cost of other patients.'
Health workers wearing protective suits interact with slum dwellers during a house-to-house health survey at Belgachia, after detection of some COVID19 positive cases, during the nationwide lockdown, in Kolkata, Thursday, April 16, 2020.  Photo: PTI
New Delhi:  A number of healthcare workers and public health activists have expressed concern over super-speciality government hospitals being converted to “COVID hospitals”. 
In an open letter written to all Indians, reminding them of their role in community participation to tame the spread of the coronavirus, the signatories stated that such an action by the government is “leading to distress of many other patients such as those with tuberculosis, HIV, cancer, non-communicable diseases, as well as emergencies.”
The letter has among signatories, Karnataka public health doctor Syliva Karpagam, AIIMS professor Shah Alam Khan and Kerala state planning board member B. Ekbal.
“Planning for COVID should not be at the cost of other patients,” they wrote. 
Also read: COVID-19 in India: A Curious Case of Missing Numbers
Calling community participation a “key” in controlling the spread of COVID-19 and “an important measure to keep our vulnerable communities safe,” the signatories particularly called on the MLAs, MPs, corporators, police, media and religious leaders to play a crucial role in strengthening it by highlighting certain issues, including the need for essential public transport, mainly in remote areas, and better food security. 
“With an already poor state of nutrition and high rates of non-communicable diseases like diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, etc., this lockdown will cause even more health issues.” 
“We are particularly concerned about those in remote areas who many not be able to access healthcare in the absence of public transport,” it added.
Requesting the government to identify a broad based group of public health experts with “wide representation from all other sectors, particularly the marginalised communities to plan for the pandemic in a scientific manner”, they also suggested that people should highlight “lack of PPE (personal protection kit) for the (medical) staff, the need for decentralised public healthcare, availability of affordable lab services across the country, especially in remote and inaccessible areas.”
Also read: Delhi Hospital Fires Doctor for Social Media Posts on Shortage of Protective Gear, Masks
Calling all Indians to maintain physical distancing with social consciousness, the signatories of the open letter also expressed “extreme concern” about “reports of social distancing being used to legitimise caste-based discrimination by denying rations and other essentials”.  
The letter points out too “communalisation of the pandemic, particularly targeting Muslims”, which it said, “will prevent us from using this opportunity to identify gaps in our public health system and put pressure on the government to plug these gaps so that we are much more prepared for any future outbreak”.  
Condemning such an attitude, they said:
 “Blaming one community while not holding the government accountable serves no purpose”. 
The signatories also pointed out that several people who in spite of being role models for social distancing protocols have “themselves organised parties, religious events, celebrations and public gatherings”.  
Also read: Amidst Lockdown, Deve Gowda’s Grandson’s Wedding Draws Several to Farmhouse
The full text of the letter, along with its signatories, is below:
We are healthcare workers and public health activists who strongly feel that this crisis is a time for all Indians, irrespective of gender, caste, religion, class, sexual orientation, ability etc. to come together, extend support, help and empathise with each other, even as we urge the government to strengthen health systems.
Community participation is key in controlling the spread of a pandemic and an important measure to keep our vulnerable communities safe.
We feel that the ministers, MLAs, corporators, MPs, religious leaders, police and media have a crucial role to play in the following.
