Kejriwal Shares Delhi’s Experience of Combating COVID-19 With Leaders of 35 Cities
He had earlier addressed the same international group on the issue of air pollution in October 2019.
Kejriwal addresses an earlier conference. Photo: Twitter/AamAadmiParty
New Delhi: Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal on Friday evening represented India and the capital city at an international conference to share lessons on fighting the coronavirus pandemic. Addressing 35 leaders from top cities across the world, brought on one platform by the C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group, he said while the local transmission of the virus was so far “pretty limited”, Delhi is not being “complacent” and has planned for a rise in cases.
The conference was attended by the mayors of Los Angeles, Seoul, Paris, Milan, Istanbul and Rome, among others. They shared lessons learnt in the fight against the coronavirus. Kejriwal had addressed this group in October 2019 also, when he had shared his experiences on combating air pollution in Delhi.
Incidentally, the conference was held on a day when thousands of people began leaving Delhi on foot for their homes located hundreds of kilometres away. Many of them headed to Uttar Pradesh, as the lockdown imposed by the Centre to curb the coronavirus spread meant they could not find any work. In the absence of money and food, and due to the ban on all inter-state public transport, they were left with no option but to take their belongings and begin the arduous journey home, either alone or with their families, friends or relatives.
During his address, Kejriwal acknowledged the hardship faced by the poor due to the lockdown. “The economic fallout of the lockdown has disproportionately impacted the city’s poor, especially migrant workers from across the country who live in Delhi. To mitigate their miseries, we have started providing free cooked meals to 400,000 people every day from 550 plus distribution points,” he said.
The Delhi CM also declared that his government has already released two months advance social security pension for widows, senior citizens and the disabled persons to help them and their families tide over the lack of economic activity. “Construction workers are also being provided with sustenance allowance of Rs 5000. This is a crisis of unprecedented scale and we are committed to learn and collaborate with leaders across the world,” he said.
Kejriwal during the conference. Photo: Twitter/AamAadmiParty
As for the spread of the disease, Kejriwal said India was fortunate that the coronavirus arrived here later than other countries. “Learning from experiences of other countries, we have aggressively pursued the policy of identifying contacts and isolating them. As a result, today Delhi has less than 40 confirmed cases.” This, he said, was notable since 25 days have lapsed since the first case was detected.
Out of the 39 cases that the city has so far detected, Kejriwal said 29 cases were people with international travel history, and just 10 were cases of local transmission. “Therefore, local transmission is also pretty limited. However, we are not complacent. We wish to limit any further local transmission and would like to avoid entering stage 3 of community transmission,” he said.
It was in this light, he said, that a complete lockdown was implemented on March 23. He exuded confidence that “together, we will win”.
