COVID-19 and Elections: EC May Allow Voting Through Postal Ballots in Bihar
The commission is working out the modalities to allow people infected by the coronavirus and those above the age of 65 years to vote remotely.
A postal ballot being cast in Maharashtra. Photo: PTI
New Delhi: The Election Commission (EC) is working out the modalities to allow people infected by the coronavirus and those above the age of 65 years to vote through postal ballots in the upcoming Bihar elections, election commissioner Sushil Chandra has said in an interview to the Indian Express.
When asked by the Express reporter Ritika Chopra if the EC feared that the COVID-19 outbreak would affect the turnout in the Bihar elections – scheduled to be held by November this year, Chandra said that the EC is taking a number of steps to ensure that this does not happen.
The EC will reduce the number of voters per polling station from 1,600 to 1,000, while suspected and confirmed COVID-19 patients will be allowed to vote through a postal ballot. This facility shall also be extended to those above the age of 65 years, as they are in the vulnerable category of COVID-19.
“We are working out the other procedures how a person will notify the RO that he or she wants to vote by postal ballots. The RO will examine the request and allow the voter’s request. This person will not be allowed to cast a vote at the booth. We will go the extra mile and even ensure that, if need be, a polling officer is sent to deliver the postal ballot to the Covid-positive voter and even bring it back,” Chandra told the Indian Express, adding that these guidelines will be followed for all future elections.
To put this process into place, a new category – “Covid-19 suspect or affected persons” – has been added to the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961 in consultation with the law ministry.
Also Read: Postal Ballot Voting Rights: The Only Way Migrant Workers Can Make Their Presence Felt
A voter who has tested positive for COVID-19 at a government facility or one designated by the government will be eligible to vote through postal ballot. Voters who are under home or institutional quarantine will also be able to vote through postal ballot.
When asked about how political parties will be able to campaign for the polls, Chandra said that they will have to rely on virtual rallies for a bulk of their campaign.
“Election campaigning will also have to follow the health and NDMA guidelines. Parties will have to rely on virtual rallies and campaigning through social media. But the situation could change closer to the date of poll in Bihar,” he said.
Union home minister Amit Shah recently flagged off the BJP’s campaign for the Bihar elections through a ‘virtual rally’. Because the Centre has come under criticism for its handling of the COVID-19 crisis, Shah claimed that the rally wasn’t aimed at the elections but was an effort to “connect people with the Atmanirbhar Bharat campaign”. But during the rally in Bihar, he stated, “Under Nitish Kumar’s leadership, the NDA will come to power with two-thirds majority in the coming elections”
