'No Grassroots Coordination,' Activists Urge Jharkhand Govt to Step up Food Distribution Efforts
'While the state and district level officials are trying, there is an urgent need to make things more functional and proactive at a village level.'
A photo of an empty hearth tweeted by the Jharkhand chapter of the Right to Food Campaign. Photo: Twitter/@righttofoodjhk

New Delhi: Calling the relief measures announced by the Jharkhand chief minister “token,” the Jharkhand chapter of the Right to Food (RTF) campaign has said that the government has done little so far that goes beyond routine measures.
In view of the national lockdown, the state, as part of its emergency relief measures, has recently announced that eligible households left out of the public distribution system (PDS) would receive 10 kg of food grain if they have applied for a ration card. Moreover, mukhiyas (gram panchayat heads) have been instructed to give 10 kg of food grain to needy households from their contingency fund of Rs 10,000.
However, members of the RTF campaign believe that this fund is far too small to provide even one-time rations of 10 kg to the seven lakh excluded households who have applied for a ration card. “No provision has been made for integrating excluded households into the PDS during this crisis. And this contingency fund existed earlier – it cannot be counted as a relief measure,” read a statement released by the RTF campaign members on Monday.
Also read: What the Jharkhand Govt Is Doing – and Can Do – to Mitigate Coronavirus Impact
Speaking to The Wire, Asharfi Nand Prasad, a member of the RTF campaign said, “People in different parts of state are facing problems in procuring ration. They are also not receiving 10 kg of food grain as promised.” According to Prasad, on the ground, people are facing a shortage of food grains. He claimed that they have received complaints from Jamshedpur, Garhwa, Palamu and Dumka, among others.
शर्मनाक: “राशन लेने गये तो डीलर के पति भोला सिंह ने यह कह कर लाभुक को फटकार लगाकर भागा दिया कि तुम बाहर काम करने गया था, बीमारी लेकर आया है जाओ राशन नहीं मिलेगा” (1/n) @HemantSorenJMM @LateharDistrict @jharkhand181 @vinodbagodar pic.twitter.com/fkM3QhOOej
— Jharkhand RTFC (@righttofoodjhk) April 6, 2020

When asked if the government is not acting, the RTF Campaign member said, the real problem is at local level as there are serious issues of implementation as well as shortage of food. “While the state and district level officials are trying, there is an urgent need to make things more functional and proactive at a village level and in remote areas of the state,” Prasad told The Wire over phone, speaking from the state capital Ranchi.
Meanwhile, as per local media reports, there have been at least two alleged hunger deaths during the lockdown. On Monday, Hindi daily Hindustan reported that in Bhandariya block of Garhwa, an elderly woman had died of hunger on Saturday. The local administration, however, has denied the allegation that it is a hunger death.
Another case of alleged hunger death has been reported in Ramgarh district of the state. As per a report by Hindi daily Dainik Bhaskar, in Sangrampur village of the district, a 70-year-old woman old died on Wednesday, allegedly of hunger. However, the local administration has denied the allegation here as well, claiming there was enough food available in the house.
Meanwhile, as per a telephonic survey conducted by the non-governmental organisation Jan Sahas, among workers from north and central India, “Forty two percent of the workers mentioned that they had no ration left even for the day, let alone for the duration of the lockdown”.
The survey also found that if the lockdown continued beyond 21 days, 66% of the labourers said that they will not be able to manage their household expenses for more than a week.
Given the situation, the campaign members have further demanded that the state government cover all these households under PDS, with regular monthly rations. “The government should also take extensive measures to strengthen the public distribution system in this time of crisis,” they demanded, adding the crisis is likely to last for months, even if the lockdown ends soon.
Also read: What Does the COVID-19 Lockdown Mean for Food Security?
Notably, last month, another civil society organisation working in the state, Jharkhand Janadhikar Mahasabha (JJM) had demanded that in order to deal with the three-week nationwide lockdown, the state government, in addition to health services, should also ensure adequate income and food security for the people of the state.
As per the JMM, “In a state with endemic hunger and undernutrition, ensuring food and other essentials for the poor should be a top priority.”
The JJM had therefore demanded that the Central and state governments take a cue from measures adopted by Kerala and many other countries to expand extensive healthcare and social welfare services to the people. In this regard, the JJM has listed out 15 demands under the head of ‘social security, public health services and awareness’.
