Social Distancing Forgotten, Country Raises a Racket at 5 pm
In some places, residents came out to the streets beating drums. Firecrackers too were burst in several localities.
The Bachchans clap at 5 pm in Mumbai. Photo: PTI
New Delhi: Amidst news of a rapidly rising number of cases of COVID-19, lockdowns in several states, the ceasing of railway services and the sealing of Delhi’s borders, the popular highlight of the daylong ‘janata curfew’ on Sunday, March 22, came at 5 pm.
In response to a call by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday, March 19, men, women and children who had for the day been at home, emerged on to the streets and on the balconies to raise a veritable din. Modi had asked for five minutes worth of applause, ringing of bells and the banging of household items to ‘deliver’ thanks to healthcare professionals and workers who have been putting their lives on the line to fight the spread of the coronavirus and maintain normalcy at this time.
What took place across apartment complexes and households in some parts of the country was a nearly 30-minute long ritual where not only was there raucous clapping, but also the banging of brass and steel plates amidst the blowing of conch shells and ululation. In places, residents came out on to the streets beating drums. Firecrackers too were burst in several places, raising a racket that far outlasted the five minute limit.
The tenets of social distancing — so integral to the fight to keep the coronavirus at bay — were largely ignored.


As videos flowed in from different quarters of India, the voluntary 14-hour curfew, announced by Prime Minister Narendra Modi to encourage social distancing seems to have achieved the opposite.










The exercise saw large participation by children, most of whom have no school thanks to the abrupt closures and the deferment of exams.


Even as Union ministers and political leaders diligently followed the prime minister’s call, social media exploded with criticisms of the the heightened social interactions on a day people were supposed to stay at home.


Social distancing? This is collective suicide https://t.co/5Z1GBJhV5m
— Swati Chaturvedi (@bainjal) March 22, 2020

This is insanity. What has Modi started? These people are doing thali banging as a collective. Imagine the spread of corona. Social distancing? pic.twitter.com/rQXzUGxZnb
— Swati Chaturvedi (@bainjal) March 22, 2020

Meanwhile DM Pilibhit Vaibhav Srivastava and SP Pilibhit Abhishek Dixit today at 5pm. @myogioffice @CMOfficeUP @dgpup @AwasthiAwanishK pic.twitter.com/ygpEHwU4hx
— Qazi Faraz Ahmad (@qazifarazahmad) March 22, 2020

Ahmedabad’s own version of social distancing! https://t.co/a99A898gEk
— Rohini Singh (@rohini_sgh) March 22, 2020

This is what happens when jingoism overshadows real effort put in by hundreds of doctors, nursing staff, airline crew, police, government staff, paramilitary, army, journalists etc. But political leaders busy playing antakshari! #covid19 https://t.co/EpBQ0Gaeac
— vijaita singh (@vijaita) March 22, 2020

कोरोना की बारात निकली है। (2020) pic.twitter.com/JZKbqNNYWB
— History of India (@RealHistoryPic) March 22, 2020

Meanwhile, the Union health ministry thanked people for observing the janata curfew. The minister-in-charge also thanked the prime minister for inspiring citizens to follow social distancing.
STANDING OVATION to lakhs of #coronawarriors who are selflessly leading the battle against #coronavirus
These are our heroes who’re risking their lives so we all #StaySafe
Deepest gratitude to @narendramodi ji who has inspired each citizen to follow #socialdistancing pic.twitter.com/qM2jJ1PIuV
— Dr Harsh Vardhan (@drharshvardhan) March 22, 2020

Earlier in the day, the prime minister tweeted to remind people of the clapping event, and also to tell them that each citizen is “a valued soldier” in the “battle” against COVID-19.
Also read: States Announce Self-Imposed Lockdowns To Battle Coronavirus
Do remember,
5 PM this evening for 5 minutes…
Be on your terraces, balconies or windows to express gratitude to all those who are working 24/7 so that our nation becomes free from COVID-19. #JantaCurfew pic.twitter.com/Cwds0v4cJ8
— Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 22, 2020

Quality family time, television and some good food.
Each of you is a valued soldier in this battle against COVID-19.
Your being alert and cautious can help lakhs of other lives. #JantaCurfew https://t.co/zuoocrP4Th
— Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 22, 2020

However, as people appeared to celebrate the success of  the “janata curfew” together and appeared to go back to their usual routines, the prime minister had to caution them by the end of the day. “The janata curfew will end at 9 p.m tonight but this does not mean you should celebrate. Do not consider it as a success. This is just the beginning of a long battle,” he said.
आज का #JantaCurfew भले ही रात 9 बजे खत्म हो जाएगा, लेकिन इसका मतलब यह नहीं है कि हम सेलिब्रेशन शुरू कर दें। इसको सफलता न मानें। यह एक लम्बी लड़ाई की शुरुआत है। आज देशवासियों ने बता दिया कि हम सक्षम हैं, निर्णय कर लें तो बड़ी से बड़ी चुनौती को एक होकर हरा सकते हैं।
— Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 22, 2020

केंद्र सरकार और राज्य सरकारों द्वारा जारी किए जा रहे निर्देशों का जरूर पालन करें। जिन जिलों और राज्यों में Lockdown की घोषणा हुई है, वहां घरों से बिल्कुल बाहर न निकलें। इसके अलावा बाकी हिस्सों में भी जब तक बहुत जरूरी न हो, तब तक घरों से बाहर न निकलें। #JantaCurfew
— Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 22, 2020

