Home Ministry Warns Govt Officials Against Holding Zoom Meetings
In the last few weeks, the videoconferencing app has reportedly been used by a a few top government officials.
The Zoom Video Communications logo is pictured at the NASDAQ MarketSite in New York, New York, US, April 18, 2019. Photo: Reuters/Carlo Allegri

New Delhi: Zoom meeting platform is not safe and it is not to be used for official purposes by government officials, the Home Ministry said on Thursday.
The warning, earlier issued by Computer Emergency Response Team (Cert-In), was reiterated by the Cyber Coordination Centre (CyCord) of the Home Ministry in an advisory.
“This advisory states that the platform is not for use by government officers/officials for official purposes,” a statement from the ministry said.
Zoom became a popular application for executives conducting meetings while working from home during the countrywide lockdown announced by the central government to contain coronavirus pandemic in the country.
Also read: How Can COVID-19 Contact Tracing Techniques be Formulated Without Violating Privacy?
“The document makes reference to earlier advisories of the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (Cert-In) and states that Zoom is not a safe platform. The guidelines have been issued to safeguard private individuals who would still like to use the platform for private purposes,” the ministry said.
It said the advisory has been issued to prevent any unauthorised entry into a Zoom conference room and to prevent unauthorised participants to carry out malicious attacks on the terminals of other users in the conference.
In the last few weeks, the videoconferencing app has been used by a number of top Indian government officials, the most prominent of which allegedly includes Defence Minister Rajnath Singh.
Earlier Defence Minister Rajnath Singh had posted a pic where he was seen using Zoom for a virtual meeting. pic.twitter.com/HskpfKZnl6
— vijaita singh (@vijaita) April 16, 2020

(With inputs from PTI)
