Watch | How Indian Police Coerced Anti-CAA Protesters
Given the recent rise in global protests, it is important to revisit how the police operate at protest sites.

Mumbai: On February 12, my colleague Suraj and I visited the protest site commonly known as Mumbai Bagh. Women residing near Mumbai Central had occupied the Morland road outside Hotel Arabia to protest the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) and the National Register of Citizens (NRC). We went there primarily to understand police procedures. The on-duty personnel were not authorised to speak to us officially. When Shalini Sharma, former senior inspector of Nagpada police station, arrived a few hours later, I approached her for an interview. Instead of giving a quote or comment, she got agitated and threatened to file a notice under section 145 of the Indian Penal Code, (joining or continuing an unlawful assembly that has been commanded to disperse).
Having spent more than two weeks in proximity, the protestors and police had developed a keen awareness of each other. I spoke to protestors present at the site about police-citizen relations, which were skewed by power and authority. The Mumbai police issued legal notices to several peaceful protestors and collected their photographs and home addresses. Some individuals were detained and coerced into giving out information on their phones. It is worth remembering that in Uttar Pradesh, the BJP-led government put up hoardings with protestors names, faces and addresses in public places.


The nationwide protests were paused due to the risk of coronavirus spreading at mass gatherings. The pandemic has also presented an opportunity for the state to further stifle criticism. Journalists, students, activists and intellectuals who have been vocal about the CAA and NRC are being relentlessly persecuted under the draconian Unlawful Activities Prevention Act (UAPA). The indomitable spirit of protestors and their belief that truth will ultimately prevail, embodied by the iconic slogan Sab Yaad Rakha Jayega, keep the movement alive despite this strategic silencing of dissent.
We did not put this video out earlier because we wanted to go back to interview some of the women about their experiences. However, given the recent rise in global protests, we felt it was important to revisit and share this information about how the police operate at protest sites. In the US, protestors are covering up their faces and other personal identifiers, using encryption services for digital privacy and ensuring that they have legal aid.
When India returns to the streets, it is essential for citizens whose goal is to safeguard the constitutional promises of justice, liberty, equality and fraternity to take measures to protect themselves against state excesses. Because, as the COVID-19 lockdown has proved, dissent will be dealt with an iron hand.
Nikita Parikh recently graduated from the Tata Institute of Social Sciences in Mumbai. Her professional experience and academic interests lie at the intersection of education, media and social change. Suraj Katra is based out of Mumbai and works as a communications consultant and photographer. He uses the camera for inquiry and to communicate human-centred narratives. 
