New Report Says Refugees, Displaced People Especially Vulnerable to COVID-19 Pandemic
As most countries secure their borders and citizens, refugees and displaced communities do not have the luxury of maintaining 'social distance'.
File photo: Women sit next to tents, at a makeshift camp for refugees and migrants next to the Moria camp, on the island of Lesbos, Greece, March 11, 2020. Photo: Reuters/Elias Marcou/File Photo

While India witnesses its first-ever lockdown in history due to a virus, it is the most vulnerable and marginalised sections of the people who have been making headlines over the past week. Visuals of overcrowded buses and migrant families mapping long distances on foot have proven that ‘stay at home’ and ‘social distancing’ are privileges not everyone can afford.
The migrant workers who emptied out from Indian cities were not refugees or even displaced people in the strict sense but their plight is an indication of the kind of impact COVID-19 is having on displaced persons around the world.
Migrant workers walk towards a bus station along a highway with their families as they return to their villages, during a 21-day nationwide lockdown to limit the spreading of coronavirus disease (COVID-19), in Ghaziabad, on the outskirts of New Delhi, March 29, 2020. Photo: Reuters/Adnan Abidi
Refugees International, a non-profit humanitarian organisation, released a report on March 30 on how COVID-19 will affect the millions who fall within this category. The report underlines the need for policymakers, humanitarian organisations, governments and multilateral bodies to respond to those in need of assistance. As the coronavirus spreads, it will disproportionately impact the most vulnerable, among them refugees, asylum seekers, and internally displaced people (IDPs).
The report runs  analyses the situation of refugees across different parts of the world, accounting for more than 70 million people who fall into this category. It is crucial to understand the factors which make them extremely susceptible to infection.
America
With 245,573 confirmed cases (data recorded till April 3), the United States is leading the charts with countries affected by COVID-19 in America, followed by Canada with 11,284 recorded cases. Countries like Peru, Guatemala, and Colombia are implementing strong measures to combat the spread of the virus. However, Mexico and Brazil have taken much longer to understand the severity of this health crisis.
The US government mandated port and border closures on March 21. It has empowered the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to turn back asylum seekers to Mexico or repatriate them to their home countries without due process. Some of the shelters housing asylum seekers on the Mexican side of the border have been forced to close because of the coronavirus. The report states that the Mexican government has agreed to accept most Central American returnees, except unaccompanied minors. However, it is unclear if the US or Mexico would arrange the deportation of  Venezuelans or Cubans in lieu of allowing them to seek asylum. Mexico has confirmed 1,510 coronavirus cases till now.
People wait in line for a meal at the Matamoros (Mexico) migrant encampment. Photo: Reuters
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on displaced Venezuelans living in Colombia is likely to worsen. As of April 3, the number of confirmed cases in the country rose to 1161 with 19 recorded deaths. Although the Colombian government has been gracious towards migrants and displaced communities, they face their own economic challenges – especially the healthcare system. The coronavirus pandemic is likely to aggravate these challenges.
Also read: Indian Scientists Issue Statement on Pandemic, Call for ‘Cooperation’, ‘Humanity’
Asia
Besides Afghan refugees (in Iran, Pakistan, and Afghanistan) and Rohingyas (in Bangladesh), Asia is home to millions of displaced communities.
After the pandemic broke out from China, Iran was one of the initial countries which recorded the most number of confirmed cases (50,468 on April 3) and in turn, fatalities. Several refugees have fled the country, hoping to find respite in Afghanistan. But the latter, too, is struggling to contain the virus as the numbers are rising every day. It must be noted that Afghanistan’s health ministry warned, on March 24, that half of the country’s almost 39 million people might be infected.
Rohingya refugees collect drinking water at the Shalbagan refugee camp in Teknaf, Bangladesh, March 5, 2019. Photo: Reuters/Mohammad Ponir Hossain – RC1880076180
The situation is no different for nearly 900,000 Rohingya refugees living in camps at Bangladesh’s Cox Bazar. Accommodated in cramped spaces within close proximity to over 400,000 Bangladeshis, they are the most vulnerable to the virus. Lack of communication, medical gear and lack of trust towards the authorities heighten their problems.
Europe
After China, the European Union emerged as the new epicentre for the novel coronavirus. Leading the pack, Italy has recorded 115,242 cases and 13,915 deaths till now. Spain, Germany, France, and the United Kingdom also reported significantly high numbers which led to many countries calling for nationwide lockdowns. The impact on refugees and asylum seekers has been significant. By March 16, Greece, Hungary, Belgium, and the Netherlands had shut their asylum offices.
File Photo: A view of a makeshift camp for refugees and migrants next to the Moria camp, on the island of Lesbos, Greece, March 11, 2020. Photo: Reuters/Elias Marcou/File Photo
By April 3, Greece confirmed 1,554 coronavirus cases and 53 deaths. The government was quick to act and called for a country-wide lockdown including suspending the registration of asylum seekers or reviewing appeals. More than 40,000 refugees trapped on the Aegean Islands are the most susceptible to the coronavirus. These makeshift camps lack basic hygiene facilities and only provide basic medical care. With no running water, washing hands frequently is a luxury they cannot afford.
The Middle East
With at least 12 million refugees and IDPs residing in Syria, Lebanon, Iraq, and Turkey, the Middle East is fast catching up to its European neighbour. The borders across countries here are porous, with refugees often travelling via informal routes. The healthcare system in many of the region’s countries is ruptured or under stress.
File photo: An internally displaced Syrian girl wears a face mask as members of the Syrian Civil defence sanitize the Bab Al-Nour internally displaced persons camp, to prevent the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Azaz, Syria March 26, 2020. Photo: Reuters/Khalil Ashawi
Turkey is home to over 3.4 million Syrian refugees. Out of which more than 1 million people are staying in overcrowded and unhygienic camps where it is very challenging to impose social distancing. Due to a lack of job avenues, people are forced to work on a daily basis to sustain themselves.
Also read: Afghanistan’s Open Border With Iran Leaves it Vulnerable to COVID-19
Africa
Although the number of confirmed cases in the African subcontinent is relatively low, the suspension of flights and self-imposed quarantines across most of the world have prevented the delivery of much-needed humanitarian staff and cargo to respond to ongoing crises in these countries.
What is the solution?
A collective and inclusive effort is the need of the hour, the Refugees International report says. While countries across the world secure their borders and citizens, they should take into account that this is a global health crisis and a humanitarian issue. Governments receiving external assistance for the coronavirus should ensure that displaced communities within their border are also included in their plan of action.
In times such as this, panic and chaos run high among people. In addition, most refugees have no access to credible information and communication with the outer world. It is of utmost importance to educate them on the gravitas of the situation at hand while making them aware of how prioritising hygiene is perhaps our best shot against the virus.
Considering the closed spaces they reside in, it is crucial to deploy medical personnel, supplies, and personal protective equipment, the report says. On March 16, World Health Organisation head Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said there is an urgent need to escalate testing. Deportation of any individual without prior medical testing may risk the virus transmission into countries that may not have been affected so far and thus be unprepared to deal with the outbreak.
