No Relaxation of Lockdown in Most Delhi NCR Areas Over High Number of Hotspot Areas
Colonies and areas under containment orders or red zones have been sealed for up to 28 days.
Vehicles parked on both sides of a road at Yusuf Sarai marker during the national lockdown, in New Delhi, April 20, 2020. Photo: PTI/Kamal Singh

New Delhi: The Centre’s decision to allow relaxation of lockdown norms in districts that do not have a high incidence of COVID-19 cases did not make much of a change to the situation in New Delhi and its surrounding satellite townships of Ghaziabad and Noida in UP and Faridabad and Gurgaon in Haryana due to a large number of hotspots, or ‘red zones’.
Across India, 170 districts out of the 720 districts have been put in the category of ‘red zones’.
Relaxation would have meant many more services
This meant that availability of additional services that were allowed by the Ministry of Home Affairs across the country from April 20 remained suspended in these areas. These included animal husbandry activities, financial sector, social sector, operations of public utilities, commercial and private establishments, industries or industrial establishments (both government and private), and construction activities.
In areas where the lockdown has been relaxed, services of essential service providers like electricians and plumbers were also to be restored.
In view of the high incidence of red zones or places with large number of COVID-19 cases or clusters with a significant spread of the virus, some of the states had announced in advance that they would not be relaxing the lockdown.
Also read: Food for All During Lockdown: State Governments Must Universalise PDS
79 hotspots, over 2,000 cases
In Delhi, where the total number of cases crossed 2,000 on Sunday, and the fatalities rose to 45, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal had declared that there would be no relaxation in lockdown.
With 79 red zones or containment zones – from which people are not allowed to move out without permission – in the city, Kejriwal had said that the capital was still witnessing a surge in coronavirus cases. As such, he declared that the lockdown restrictions would not be relaxed and that “the situation would be reviewed again after a week”.
70 residents tested in Oberoi Apartments after family takes ill
Late Saturday evening, eight new hotspots were added in Delhi. One of these was Oberoi Apartments in Civil Lines where residents of about 99 units – that include bungalows and apartments – were put under quarantine by the authorities after an elderly resident first contracted the virus and later three of his family members and three domestic workers also tested positive.
A resident of the colony, Subamal Bhattacharya, said while the elderly person has since come out of the Intensive Care Unit (ICU), all the other family members and the servants have been lodged in a quarantine facility.
He said the containment measures were introduced at around 8 pm on Saturday when a team of health officials and police placed a barricade near the main gate of the colony. COVID-19 tests were also performed on around 70 residents. The area’s Sub Divisional Magistrate and the North Delhi Mayor had also visited the complex, which once housed Lord Curzon, to take stock of the situation.
Restricted sale of items, online payments in red zones
Bhattacharya said arrangements were being made to provide essential items to residents. “We are waiting to see if they would provide these through designated shops or post some vehicles for this service.” However, he added, that the sale hours would be restricted for each of the category of items such as milk, vegetables and groceries.
In Noida, which is part of the Gautam Buddh Nagar district in UP, residents of several colonies have been placed under containment due to the large number of positive cases reported there. One of the colonies which was recently added to the list here was Sector 15-A, which is very close to the township’s border with Delhi.
Also read: How India’s States Can Read COVID-19 Data to Make the Most of the Lockdown
Here, the RWA issued messages to the residents saying payment to Mother Dairy, Safal and other grocery and chemist shops in the sector would only be accepted through digital wallets. “Cash would not be transacted in the sector’s shops till the sealing order is in place. This is as per Noida police’s directions,” the order stated.
Colony sealed for 28 days, residents living off essential services
In other sectors off the township, which have been under a containment order for a few days now, residents said they have been receiving supply of essential commodities through either Mother Dairy and Big Bazaar or the city administration. Vaishali, a resident of Sector 28, said vans of Mother Dairy and Big Bazaar have been coming regularly to the sector for supplying vegetables and grocery. “The administration has also allowed a regular Mother Dairy outlet to function within the sector,“ she added.
In Noida, the administration has sealed 19 hotspots for 28 days. The Gautam Budh Nagar district has been one of the worst affected by the virus, having reported 97 cases thus far.
