Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan Tests Positive for COVID-19
The BJP leader asked all his close contacts to get tested and quarantine themselves.
Madhya Pradesh chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan. Photo: PTI/File
New Delhi: Madhya Pradesh chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan on Saturday said that he has tested positive for the coronavirus infection. Chouhan shared the news on Twitter, saying he was tested after showing symptoms of COVID-19.
“I had symptoms of COVID-19. The report returned positive. I appeal to all my colleagues and those who come in contact with me to get tested for the coronavirus infection. My close contacts should quarantine themselves,” Chouhan said in a tweet.
मेरे प्रिय प्रदेशवासियों, मुझे #COVID19 के लक्षण आ रहे थे, टेस्ट के बाद मेरी रिपोर्ट पॉज़िटिव आई है। मेरी सभी साथियों से अपील है कि जो भी मेरे संपर्क में आए हैं, वह अपना कोरोना टेस्ट करवा लें। मेरे निकट संपर्क वाले लोग क्वारन्टीन में चले जाएँ।
— Shivraj Singh Chouhan (@ChouhanShivraj) July 25, 2020

In another tweet, the chief minister said that if detected and treated on time, COVID-19 infection can be cured.
“I have been reviewing the status of coronavirus infection in the state every evening since March 25. Now I will try to review the situation through video conferencing as much as possible,” he said.
While it is not yet clear how the MP chief minister may have contracted the disease, the development comes days after his cabinet colleague Arvind Singh Bhadoria tested positive for the viral infection.
Chouhan also said that in his absence, the meeting to review the coronavirus situation will be held by home minister Narottam Mishra, urban development and administration minister Bhupendra Singh, medical education minister Vishwas Sarang and health minister Prabhuram Choudhary.
Madhya Pradesh’s governor Lalji Tandon passed away on July 21. He was admitted to hospital in June with COVID-like symptoms, but his test returned negative. According to reports, the Madhya Pradesh cabinet minister Bhadoria tested positive for COVID-19 late on July 22. He had attended Tandon’s funeral in Lucknow, triggering fears among many who he may have come in contact. This included defence minister Rajnath Singh, Chouhan and the entire state cabinet.
(With PTI inputs)
