Congress Calls Meeting of 18 Opposition Parties on Friday
The government's handling of the coronavirus pandemic, the migrant issue and states' suspension of labour laws look to be some of the topics of discussion.
Congress president Sonia Gandhi. Photo: PTI
New Delhi: Upping its ante, the Congress that has persistently been raising questions on the Union government’s preparedness and efficacy in containing the novel coronavirus, has now called a video conference meeting of all opposition parties on Friday. 
NDTV reported that the meeting would moot discussions on crucial matters like “the government’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic, the migrant issue, the states’ suspension of labour laws, and the freeze on the activities of the various parliamentary committees which function even when the parliament is not in session”.
Eighteen parties, including DMK, the Left parties, and Trinamool Congress, have been invited in the meeting which will be chaired by the Congress chief Sonia Gandhi. 
Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee has already confirmed her attendance. “I will attend. It is a good thing. We will discuss the COVID-19 situation.”
Nationalist Congress Party chief Sharad Pawar is also expected to participate. 
Also read: Watch | Why Nirmala Sitharaman Lost Her Cool As Rahul Gandhi Met Migrants
Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala indicated that the meeting was announced to frame a united action plan to tide over the “legislative oversight”. As lockdown measures have been eased, the opposition looks set to raise its pitch against the government for its alleged lack of transparency and inability to devise a holistic plan to handle the economic and social crisis induced by the pandemic.
Since the government has contended that all parliamentary standing committee meetings have to be held in the presence of a camera, the opposition leaders see the step as the government’s way to make the opposition “immobile”.
“The government has been resisting this (the meetings),” a senior opposition leader told NDTV.
Congress leaders heading such standing committees like Shashi Tharoor and Anand Sharma have written to the presiding officers requesting that committees could meet through video conference, on the lines of the government’s virtual meetings. 
Over-centralisation of powers during the lockdown has been a cause of concern for the opposition, and many leaders have been demanding that democratic functions be resumed as soon as possible, especially since lockdown measures are also being eased now. 
Until now, opposition leaders had extended support to the government in its efforts to curb the spread of the virus, but have expressed fear that the unilateral decision-making can set undemocratic precedents. The suspension of labour laws by different BJP-ruled states, delayed financial assistance by the Centre to the states, and migrant labour crisis have all sparked political rows between the Union government and the opposition.  
