No Crisis Too Big For Kashmir's Young Volunteers
While some have turned down government offer for money, others have laboured with 2G internet to download COVID-19 dos and don'ts for villagers.
PPE kit making volunteers in Srinagar. Photo: By special arrangement.
Srinagar: As the world struggles with the coronavirus, 28-year-old Faheem Mir was not going to be one to be left behind.
Mir is from Paazwanpora area of Rafiabad belt, north Kashmir’s Baramulla district. On March 27, he formed a volunteer committee at his village. First, they asked people to stay indoors. 
“We will deliver all essentials at your door,” was Mir’s plea.
With seven others, Mir set about reducing footfall in the village roads.
“Like many villages in Kashmir, the health system in our village is not efficient. So, if the virus hit anyone here, I am sure we cannot stop its escalation,” says Mir. 
A freelance journalist working with a local magazine, Mir read up on whatever information he could access with a 2G internet connection. He formed a WhatsApp group for villagers. “Small video clips guiding people as to what to do and what not to do would take hours for me to download,” he told The Wire. 
Faheem Mir of Paazwanpora area of Baramulla. Photo: By special arrangement.
“Later, I describe these in the WhatsApp group for the safety of my people. I feel it is my responsibility.”
Usually, people in the area are social. “They sit in groups under trees, streets, or outside shops . To avoid this, we formed another group on WhatsApp called “Baradari”. In it, we share entertaining content like memes,” he says.
Mir’s work is not without criticism, but it is outweighed by the appreciation he receives. Many adjacent villages have followed his example.
Like Mir, in Srinagar, 38-year-old Hakim Ilyas is helping frontline workers by providing them with personal protective equipment (PPE) kits.
“We decided to prepare these kits at the local level to help healthcare professionals deal with the rigours of the crisis,” he says.
 On March 22, Ilyas contacted skilled workers like tailors and other manufacturers who were already in the market, to manufacture PPE kits. 
Two days later, they finally started delivering products. “We contacted every person working in our NGO, Ehsaas Trust International, to take the drive ahead. Since then, 321 people are engaged actively in this,” he told The Wire.
So far, they have delivered PPE kits to COVID-19 hospitals like Chest Diseases Hospital, JLN hospital, JVC and others. Apart from Srinagar, they supplied kits to districts like Kupwara, Baramulla, Sopore, Anantnag, and Pulwama as per necessities put forth by district authorities.
Also read: Doing Their Bit: The Extraordinary Men and Women of These Extraordinary Times
Kit deliveries take place every day. The 321 people work nearly 18-hour shifts and are the only leading organisation currently operating in Kashmir who is supplying PPE kits and masks. 
“We are making around 800 suits per day with 5,000 triple layer masks,” he says. “On the ground, one hospital on an average requires around 130 to 150 kits. With the almighty’s help, our dedicated team will be able to fulfil the demand easily.” 
PPE kit making volunteers in Srinagar. Photo: By special arrangement.
“Along with kits, we are supplying triple layer masks and full head-to-toe cover body shields to any person engaged in the services of quarantined people,” says Ilyas, who has made separate teams for management, delivery, processing, quality check and demand. 
Hakim Ilyas addresses the team on PPE kits. Photo: By special arrangement.
“Polypropylene [the material used to make these kits] is not easily available in the market due to the lockdown. Also, the sellers have hiked the price of raw material citing various reasons,” he says, adding that polypropylene which contains 90 to 130 GSM thicknesses is considered best for frontline users. 
Ilyas would like more doctors and experts to come on board for quality checks. The team has received enough funds to pay tailors and other processing units.
When authorities offered them money, Ilyas refused.
Apart from funds, he says that the Srinagar district administration has supported them fully by providing them with free transport and another services. “They appreciated our work and are there to help in any circumstances,” says Ilyas.
The market price of one kit is around Rs 1,000 to 1,200. Ilyas’s team has been able to produce the same kit at Rs 230-350. This is because of the fluctuating price of the raw material, he says. 
Ifrah Butt, 28, a volunteer from Srinagar, has also joined the team to help them. “I could not stop myself. We all know how important it is to ensure the safety of our frontline workers. Their protection is a must,” she says.
For her and for others, this is but a small exercise in helping others first and then helping oneself.
