New academic calendar, vacations, how to conduct college exams — latest task for Modi govt
New Delhi: The Modi government is working on a contingency plan for the higher education sector as the academic calendar has been disrupted because of the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic.  
The plan, which is likely to be announced after 14 April, will include an alternate academic calendar, ways to conduct exams for colleges and universities, a new schedule for vacations and announcement of results.  
Apart from this, the plan will also include suggestions to improve the career prospects of students.  
The University Grants Commission (UGC) had on 6 April constituted a seven-member committee to look into a contingency plan.  
The committee is headed by the vice-chancellor of the Central University of Haryana, R.C. Kuhad. Other members include the vice-chancellors of Banasthali Vidyapith, Panjab University and the Shri Vaishnav Vidyapeeth Vishwavidyalaya, the director of Inter University Accelerator Centre and two joint secretaries of the UGC.  
“We have an unforeseen situation at hand and no one knows when colleges and universities can re-open, which is why there is a need to have a contingency plan. A committee has been constituted to look into all the aspects of higher education,” UGC secretary Rajnish Jain told ThePrint. 
“It will look at several issues, including an alternate academic calendar, possibility of conducting exams during the current scenario and announcement of results. The members of the committee are highly experienced academicians and we are sure they will be able to come up with the best solution for all the issues.” 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: Schools want summer vacations advanced, we’ll decide after lockdown: CBSE secretary
The secretary said that the committee is looking at the existing options, like going through various rules and statutes of UGC and how they can be applied to the current scenario.  
“Our immediate concern is conducting examinations on time and starting the new academic session, so that students are not at loss,” he said. “The committee is looking for ways in which this can be done by going through the existing rules and regulations of UGC.  
“Apart from that, the mandate is also to look at the career and internship prospects for students because the lockdown will have a likely effect on that as well,” he added.  
The likely effects of the Covid-19 pandemic on career prospects is evident, with the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) and Indian Institutes of Management (IIMs) bracing themselves for withdrawal of job offers after a US-based research firm rescinded its offers last week.  
A report will be submitted to the Ministry of Human Resource Development on 13 April suggesting various ways the government can tide over the crisis and a plan is likely to be announced after that.   
Exams in universities and colleges that were scheduled post 24 March had to be postponed because of the 21-day lockdown announced by the Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Usually, March-April is the time for examinations in most higher education institutions and some of them also complete the last bit of syllabus during this period.
Also read: Admission offers in hand but no date, Indian students could ditch foreign plans for now
 
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Me B A  first year ki student hu.. Meri corresponding classes hoti h jo weekly one day hoti h.. That’s why i cant prepare my studies.. Or mujhe pta nhi chl paa rha exam kb or kese honge.. Koi site bhi open nhi ho paa rhi h.. Plzzzzzz😭 koi mujhe bta do.. I m very tensed 😞
Medical colleges are being unfair on final year PG students by delaying their final exams.They are making them work in such stressful corona period where the students life is at risk. Also, they are giving them pressures of exams.These students have spent 3 years away from their parents ,spouses and kids….Now they deserve their degrees.Govt and medical colleges should not be unjust to them nor take unfair advantage of their situation
Everyone commenting about regular examinations what about supplementary examinations? We are from 2015 batch
Main Jammu university ki ba part 3rd ki student hu or iss virous ki waja se study bhi Nahi ho payi plz hame pass Kar do kyuki hamare exam incomplete hai hamari life se Jada paper to Nahi hai next time se hamne khud hi exam dene hai plz plz
Na Mera college se pyar he na Mera pyar college me he . To krlo kitni krni he lockdown/shotdown
Respected educationalists, as we know the present situation though out the world is pandemic due to this virus n our country is also under this attack so presently the first priority of every nation is to how to control this virus, n how to save the more n more lives and our country is also doing the same. So i think it’s not clear till when this crises will last, and it will be not good idea to avoid social distancing during these days Or till we will get green signal from medical experts who r directly or indirectly working on this virus. So by looking on present situation it doesn’t seem that this crises will end within weeks or 1,2 months. So this shows it is not possible to conduct examination on time Or within coming 1 month. So i think I will be better to go for multiple choice question papers for all type of courses (MCQ) in oder to save time atleast ( paper setting time, printing time, exam conducting time, paper writing time and finally paper evaluation time) , bcz we all know MCQ will consume very less time as compared to subjective type exam.
It not possible for places due unavailablabity of internet access. And unversities and other colleges donot have well infrastructure to conduct online exams. If online exams were conducting then you may never know who is cheeting from his home. It is not a better idea,,as per my opinion
Perfectly said
Sir we are at home..we don’t have accurate material to study and also internet connection is not good .  Sir, to study in this tension and stress is not easy. Make us pass through seeing our previous semester results and internals and assignments marks. We need safety of our life and not to risk ourselves.
In some states government teacher are given the task to go house to house and survey on COVID 19.
Sir,I have given my 12th boards this year.I am a  PCMB student and I will be appearing for both jee and neet.This uncertainty regarding exams along with the covid-19 pandemic is very tough to handle.I have been preparing for these exams for two years.This virus is killing thousands of people across the globe every single day.15 lakh students will be taking NEET exam and not all of us have exam centres in our city.We will have to travel by train to give the exam.The 3 hour exam duration is long enough for transmission to take place.Parents will be waiting outside exam centers.Sir,my father is 52 years old and suffers from diabetes and hypertension,my younger brother suffers from asthma.Most of the parents suffer from comorbid conditions due to which covid can be fatal.In our country 83% of patients are millenials.
So sir,think of a way in which  students and their families won’t have to risk their lives because these exams are really not worth losing our families and conduct these exams only when you can assure safety of every student and parent.
Respected educationalists, as we know the present situation though out the world is pandemic due to this virus n our country is also under this attack so presently the first priority of every nation is to how to control this virus, n how to save the more n more lives and our country is also doing the same. So i think it’s not clear till when this crises will last, and it will be not good idea to avoid social distancing during these days Or till we will get green signal from medical experts who r directly or indirectly working on this virus. So by looking on present situation it doesn’t seem that this crises will end within weeks or 1,2 months. So this shows it is not possible to conduct examination on time Or within coming 1 month. So i think I will be better to go for multiple choice question papers for all type of courses (MCQ) in oder to save time atleast ( paper setting time, printing time, exam conducting time, paper writing time and finally paper evaluation time) , bcz we all know MCQ will consume very less time as compared to subjective type exam..
In this situation, lets pray and hope that everything will be normal as early as possible.
In my opinion, it is not possible to have any exam during this lockdown. Let us be positive, and more over lets not compare with other countries, ‘stay safe, and healthy’ only than solution will be there.
Sir Ji please postponed the exam for June  mid because our syllabus is not completed and the risk is high  level of covid 19 so the exam postponed. When the situation comes is under controlled you will be coundect the all exams
it will be better to carry the home exams with central question papers, prepare results in respective colleges without any transportation and carry the semister forward as early as possible, when the panademic situation comes in controll
Respected educational teacher and honorable Prime Minister i want to give suggestion regarding exams at UG level where semester are applicable all the student must be promoted to next year on the past performance basis add the last sem marks and take out average that will be  correct as all the university is not capable to teach online due to connection and other problem
Well
FYI ..You cannot be sure of in what all conditions Student’s would have given the past sem exams. This is the worst thing a person can do to students. Final year final exams are must. You cannot pass/ take an average of 3rd sessional Marks.
Academic session for college level:
If the lock down takes over june end, it will be better to extend the class upto August ,so that all the internal test assessment can be completed, otherwise it may not be complete the syllabus….And let the exam be scheduled in the month of September….
Why the hell is the Department of Higher Education not adopting to Online studies, like U.S.A?
Are you all stupid or somethin’? This is the kind of nonsense which happens only in India ’cause we don’t want to progress we want to stay in the backlag.
अच्छा होता की एग्जाम जल्दी हो जाता
चाहे हम में से 1 या 2स्टूडेंट को 1 ही कक्ष में बैठना पड़े ।
डिग्री एवं अन्य कोर्स की परीक्षा की तिथि जल्दी घोषित कर देते तो अच्छा होता , चाहे एक कमरे में 1 ही स्टूडेंट को क्यों ना बैठना पड़े ।  ताकि हमारा फ्यूचर भी अच्छा रहे ।
Zinda rhoge tbhi na pass hokr kuch kr paoge… situation itni kharab h aur tum aisi suggestion de rhe ho… class Room kitne hote h ek college me aur students kitne hote h ek course me… 1 student ko 1 class me baitha dijiye… itna bakwas idea late kaha se ho
Hello sir, I am a student doing BCOM. Sir, to study in this tension and stress is not easy. Though classes not being conducted there is no use of conducting exams. Make us pass through seeing our previous semester results and internals and assignments marks. We need safety of our life and not to risk ourselves. Please take a wise decision. Thank you
Kindly cover only 70 percent of portions to conduct exams so that ,there will be no burden on students as well as for teachers
Sir we are at home..we don’t have accurate material to read out so plzzz take decision which is in favour of all students ..as many are there who even don’t know well about online classes
sir, I’m 3rd year Mbbs student from delhi. Sir my 2nd yr supply exams are postponed and so much of 3rd year time is lost. Kindly take decision in favour soon.
There is lot of prblm but we r going in delaying the all the exams which r so disgusting so plzzz I’m 1st year mbbs student,but we have to suffer as the we got degrees of mbbs that will get late,for,5 months!!,we r thinking for serving our country as soon as possible
Dear students nobody has done it purposely,people are losing their life and u r worried ur degree, haha No humanity concern you have dear…
Ok ur thinking is good…But u don’t need to wait for 5 years to serve nation…U just stay at home now that’s enough to serve nation  as of now.
Respected educational institutions and honourable prime minister, I am taking home tuitions. Let us not be in a hurry. Till the situation comes to normal it is better not to conduct board exam and other university exam. Hopefully by June every thing will come to normal. From June end and July end all the exams must be conducted. Like foreign countries this year ie 2020-2021 let the academic year be from September. So that there will be no waste of time and year. And there will be enough time for new admission and paper corrections and the announcement of results. Many educated people are willing to correct the answer papers. Hope this suggestion will help. Thank you so much.
The govt should consider seriously using the Foreign medical graduates services in Covid 19 duties and gave exemption of so called screening test . There are thousands of  FMG ‘s preparing for June 2020 exams which is unlikely to be conducted. The students how studied WHO approved colleges and got the eligibility certificate from MCI should be considered for this without wasting anytime.
First year medical students exams generally conducted by  august end. At given situation it may be possible to conduct exam at said month but last one month no class conducted and we are not sure how many more days the lockdown continue. It will be totally unfair to conduct exam with conducting the class. So the govt should consider the various exams conducted so far like internal assessment tests and midterm test for declaring result.
Let students get earlier semester results for the current semester.  Next semester run  as usual. But final year or sem students may get exam at extended date.. this will be a hustle free plan for students, teachers, management and government as a whole..
Sir we have jee mains and eamcet.so pls think anbout that exams
Sir please order to open hostel as we are facing many problem of accomodation.  Please sir
Please look into this matter that we don’t have books at home. Becoz we didn’t know that there will be a lock down of 21 days. So kindly make  decisions that favour all the students.
Hey can we talk
sir college exam  postponed ha k nhi sir april ma b ghar ha exam june me he hoge k nhi
sir college exam  postponed ha k nhi
Till date conducted class tests, mid.sem exams should be used to make final result.
Dear sir/mam
In this pandemic situation I am ready to support your every decision regarding exams .
We know that all your appropriate decision  will be suitable for our bright future and We are ready to serve  ourself for your country .
Jai Hind
Requesting to honbl. Prime minister to look into the fee hike in private schools. Since many of the private companies are not hiking the salaries. And some MNC are doing layoff and some reducing salaries nearly 30% than present salary from US. Yes we do understand. About the teachers. If this, one year they think about every one then it will come to normal life. its not mean that they can increase double next academic year. We should think that we r in statue game and once it ends we will continue our normal life. Pls . Sugest private schools to don’t increase fees for this academic year and not double hike in next academic year.
Sir I am final year student of MBBS . from AKU ,Patna and am waiting for my supply exam but this pandemic could cause huge loss in my future . so please give self center for exam..and send the marks to university.
please reply..
We can completely shift academic calender and from next year new session should start from that month too since it is not mandatory to start the classes in same months. As it is huge pandemic so whole of the system should be changed even for upcoming years as it will not hault any of us.
Let there be internal paper setting, valuation and practical examination this time. So that one can avoid unnecessary travel of examiners from one place to the other and also to avoid the delay in conducting exams and valuation.
Sir reappear walo ko pass krva do degree mil jayegi . 2 years se wait kr rhe h .
Most of the colleges and universities are taking online classes so exams can be conducted in June first week if COVID-19 situation is under control. Because of online classes completion of syllabus is not a problem
Most of the colleges and universities are taking online classes so exams can be conducted in June first week if COVID-19 situation is under control. Because of online classes completion of syllabus is not a problem.
Conduct exams for final classes like ..
Msc final ,bsc final etc with all precautionary measures.
Make Wearing masks ,gloves mandatory and there should be testing kit before taking exam
Conduct exams in the evening so that all Students can be checked properly if they are in good healthy condition.
After exam sanitise theri hands before going out of classroom.
I think there are many more such moves …so we can conduct exams
There are many states that doesn’t have enough gloves/masks for the doctors and nurses. And u know students outnumbered medical staffs. Think first about the safety of humanity. In the meantime, do prepare yr lesson. Have u ever thought about any student who is waiting for the exam but unfortunately infected/died? Think about his/family too.
They should give genral promotion based on our project and previous semester performance
Life is far great then study
For colleges we can conduct non semester examinations this year do thst last acdrmic yesrevrn semester and this academic year odd semester can be combined and  could br  conducted in November2020 after getting feedback from stifents
Respected sir..
I am the student of BCCA 1st year  2nd sem of RTMNU University.As you know because of this covid -19  students don’t have appropriate atmosphere to study, so, pass all the students according to there previous semester/exams.,so better way is to cancel the summer exams and start the new semester.
Thank you so much.
Respected sir..
I am the student of BCCA 1st year  2nd sem of RTMNU University.As you know because of this covid -19  students don’t have appropriate atmosphere to study, so, pass all the students according to there previous semester/exams.,so better way is to cancel the summer exams and start the new semester.
Thank you so much.
Resuming of classes or conducting of exams is the other word of spreading the virus especially in all the rural areas.
Conducting exams or resuming of classes is the other word of covid 19 free distribution in many rural areas.
I feel all the major calendar festival holidays should be only for the festival day. Like one day for Diwali, one day for Christmas and so on. We can make it up that way. And also have classes in Saturday. The school hours can be extended. So this is best even if the lockdown takes over june
If u teach 12hr to student per day due to think they can grasp?
I am a faculty and if i try to increase my class timing students dont want to study..
Its not possible to increase timing if u want student to understand what ur teaching..A healthy mind do v some limitations
You are not thinking about the students. They are not robots who can work all day, everyday. They also need breaks to cool down
Absolutely…… totally agree with you….!!!
Yes…it’s a good step to be  taken up by the govt.
Because……during exams ; Good environment, peace,serenity, also good food matters.
Class examas for UG degree (non technical)
Result sent to university. Question paper set
and evaluation by same  college prof. (Only this semester ). Classes starts from july 2020.
Work easy time save. Academic year no changes.
Delhi polytechnic students ke BTE exam kab se ho sakte hai sir.
Mumbai univertisy exam of fy sy will cancel or not . Please reply me immediately.
BAMU university k exams Kab honge sir
For UG sem,  degree classes (non technical).
Conduct class exam send result to the respective university. Question paper and evaluation from same college teachers. (Only this same ). Academic year starts from ಜುಲೈ 2020 as usual.
This sem, july 2020(correction please )
M.sc k exam kb hoge
All UG exams conduct like autonomous then send result marks list to university. Question paper, evaluation by college teachers like 8th 9th class only this sem.
Let academicyear start as it is from july.
All students including high school, inter college, BA, MA should be passed without conducing exam ,keeping tough situation of covid 19 at present so that new session should not be disturbed,please ensure this that 2 course exam should not be given at a same time
All students including high school, inter college, BA, MA should be passed without conducing exam ,keeping tough situation of covid 19 at present so that new session should not be disturbed
Students should be assigned online with a question paper having secondary questions related to subject /paper  they should submit online response to question to their institution.
I think board exams should not be conducted..the rest of the exams number should be calculated on the prelims basis.. because we can’t send children for exams in school where 300 students ll seat n gv the exam.its very risky…now it’s luck for children..we should focus on this ..as I know teachers ll do partiality with the children but it’s was in their destiny…
I think board exams should not be conducted..the rest of the exams number should be calculated on the prelims basis.. because we can’t send children for exams in school where 300 students ll seat n gv the exam.its very risky…now it’s luck for children..we should focus on this ..as I know teachers ll do partiality with the children but it’s was in their destiny…
Online exams can be conducted after all safety comes first
Good initiative indeed…! 👍
B.phrma 6 sem ptu ke exams kbb jo  gyee????
