Banks finally start moving on 3-month loan EMI deferment, after push from govt and RBI
New Delhi: Indian banks finally got moving Tuesday to give relief to borrowers by allowing a three-month deferment of loan EMI repayments, four days after the announcement by the Reserve Bank of India to help ease the financial impact of the coronavirus outbreak.
The implementation of the package had apparently been delayed due to confusion about the modalities, forcing the finance ministry and the central bank to intervene Tuesday.
The Department of Financial Services under the Ministry of Finance directed banks to pass on the benefits to the customers at the earliest and ensure the message is communicated to all branches, said a finance ministry official, who did not wish to be identified.
The central bank will answer some frequently asked questions (FAQs) to address the confusion, an RBI spokesperson said.
On Friday, RBI Governor Shaktikanta Das had announced a three-month loan moratorium for all term loans, providing a massive reprieve to borrowers. The loan moratorium meant that borrowers would not have to pay equated monthly instalments (EMIs) either for the loan or on the interest for three months.
It was part of the central bank’s attempts to insulate borrowers from the economic fallout of Covid-19 that has forced many small businesses to shut shop, leading to job losses.
The RBI notification had clarified that interest will continue to accrue on the outstanding portion of the loans during the moratorium period, clearly encouraging those who can afford it to continue paying their EMIs.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: These are the steps India has taken to contain economic fallout of Covid-19
Most state-run banks, including Canara Bank, Punjab National Bank (PNB), Bank of India (BoI), Bank of Baroda and the State Bank of India, took to social media Tuesday afternoon to announce that borrowers were eligible for the loan moratorium as they detailed the process of availing the scheme.
A State Bank of India spokesperson told ThePrint the moratorium will be applicable to all term loans and the bank will shortly put out details on its website.
Bank that cares…..#WeAreInThisTogether @DFS_India @DFSFightsCorona @FinMinIndia pic.twitter.com/BwVFGENpDE
— Bank of India (@BankofIndia_IN) March 31, 2020

PNB presents relief scheme for our customers. In view of COVID-19, it has been decided to defer payment of all installments on term loan and recovery of interest on cash credit facilities falling due between March 01,2020 and May 31 2020.@DFS_India @dfsfightscorona pic.twitter.com/dHRvu5luXb
— Punjab National Bank (@pnbindia) March 31, 2020

#BankofBaroda is providing a moratorium of 3 months on payment of all instalments falling due between 01.03.20 & 31.05.20 for all term loans including Corporate, MSME, Agriculture, Retail, Housing, Auto, Personal loans, etc. in pursuance of the RBI COVID-19 Regulatory Package.
— Bank of Baroda (@bankofbaroda) March 31, 2020

Important announcement for all SBI customers.@guptapk @DFS_India @DFSFightsCorona#Announcement #SBI #StateBankOfIndia pic.twitter.com/hEWSXVxVIp
— State Bank of India (@TheOfficialSBI) March 31, 2020
An HDFC official said the housing finance company will communicate with its customers in a day or two on the options of the moratorium.
Borrowers can defer the repayment of both the principal and interest components of the loan. However, interest will continue to accrue on the outstanding amount. The residual tenor of the loan will also be shifted accordingly.
Also read: India must get last mile right, direct cash payment is better than freezing loan repayment
The confusion lies in the fine print of the deferment. For customers, it remains unclear whether they need to approach banks for seeking a temporary halt in EMI repayment or whether it will be done automatically.
For instance, banks like PNB and BoI require customers to contact their respective branches to opt for the deferment. But the IDBI Bank has specifically clarified that the EMI moratorium will be uniformly applicable to all customers unless a customer specifically writes to the bank saying they wish to continue paying EMIs.
However, most banks are yet to provide this kind of clarity even though four days have passed since the RBI’s announcement.
There is also confusion on the due EMI payments of March.
Though the RBI notification issued on 27 March permitted lending institutions to grant a moratorium on payment of all instalments due between 1 March and 31 May 2020, banks continued to debit EMIs.
Also read: Lesson from Black Death: Coronavirus will transform economic life for longer than we expect
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
I had also opted the moratorium but I didn’t get it for three months as the emi for March was already paid. As per my knowledge the emi cycle for all kinds of loans are paid till 15th of every month. Then how can banks can count March month also.
The Lockdown was announced on March 22, and the moratorium was announced on March 27 then how can they count March in that period as the emi cycle had already passed. In that cases people considered that they will be getting three months after the announcement that is April, May and June.  Bank has charged me and many others for not keeping the account funded for deduction of emi in month of June.
Till date i never understood what calculation this was committing relaxation for three months and giving only two months and top of that deducting money for not having sufficient funds in bank account.
This is RBI’s and government’ hypocrisy in name of helping people. Its nothing but backstabbing.
The most foolish announcement in this era from RBI to all banks & finance companies. No 3 EMI monotorium. Eveything is false in India nobody cares. The government fools you & as a foolish we vote them. India is not, never ever be a super power till good government is formed with good administration. don’t believe anybody. India leaves on EMI only so be ready to face worst time forever.
Dear sir according to your orders emi relaxed upto June 30.  Our business was closed so no
Money how we pay in June 2020. Please relax three months more relaxation to pay emi otherwise account will be NPA
The announcement not help to the  custome.the bankers are doing clever action specially rural bank .the bank manager said no written order from the RBI.so you have to pay EMI.the announcement foolish the customer.the bank not help to the UN educated people.pls clarify the bankers.txs.
Kotak cc collection officers and India bulls officers are harassing they call again and again in a day even at around 12:00 am also they are harassing by there calls…kindly help us government how we can pay this emis salaries are also on hold
Kotak cc collection officers and India bulls officers are harassing they call again and again in a day even at around 12:00 am also they are harassing by there calls…
Bajaj finance company force to submit emi
In April 2020 according to lockdown I am late
To submit the emi they give me cheak bounce
Charge and other overdue. When I called him to know what charge they put on me they give the reason of lockdown and tell me office is closed. But for emi they call me.
Please do something about it
MY no.8909279009
Inspire of sending mail to idfc for loan morototium in march bank had deduct the emo for April and may .how their  do this .j
Sks finance ka bhi call aa raha hai emi ke leye
Dear sir/Madam aap ne kaha the ke March se lekar may tak koi EMI nahi kateyee lekin sir aap ke rule ko bilkul bhe nahi maan rahe hai Bajaj Finserv ek to AAP ne hum Ko Ghar par beetha diya aur uppar se Bajaj Finserv wale ko peeche laaga diya aap Ko aisa nahi karna chahiye aap Bajaj Finserv wale ko ke zaaheel inshan Ko kuch to sharam karo har jagah paise kaam nahi aate Madam boliye Bajaj Finserv wale ko
Bajaj finserv to is baat ko maan hi nahi raha hai or emi ke liye baar baar coll kar raha hai bank me chek bhi laga raha hai bausing charge bhi laga raha hai
I had paid my HDFC Jumbo loan EMI for the month of April,and I can’t pay,for the month of May and June, because of covid19, so will have to pay fine amount with Installments after May 30
I get personal loan at faizabad awedunivesity branch but my emi continu deducted
My emi cut today, from Sbi, govt say no emi, but how sbi cut the emi
I have Personal loan from Axis bank. My Emi is 4210 Rs . This month Emi deducted from my account ,my account balance is 2000 Rs before deduction emi, my account balance -2210 after deduction.  Bank said you must paid this month Emi with bouncing charges.  But three months exemption in Emi announced by RBI governor. What should I do..
This is only eyewash. Banks are not willing to provide moratorium.
मेरे बजाज परसनल लोन 5/4 2020 को EMI कटा  फेकु सरकार
Hero Finecrop Two wheeler loan EMI postponed or not?
Mera emi kata gaya hai Bajaj finance ne or 1000 rupis ,bola upar se ordar nahi mila,boliye sir abhi
Kya Bajaj finance ko nihe kaha Gaya hai ke 3 mahena Tak EMi rok na hai    ya castamber ko SMS aur call Kar ke parashan Kar rahain hai please bhaiyon,,,
it is useless….. BANKs  don’t care about RBI instructions or the people….banks does not inform customers & continued the EMI deduction, and not replying any calls or emails of customers….total bullshits …….& where should we take this matter… Nothing is mentioned….
As per my bank Home First Finance company they did not have any circular for private bank circulars for moratorium from RBI,
Kindly do something for this trouble,
Hope you people can help us.
Waiting for your reply.
Thanks
Home credit help 6a 3 month mata
State Bank of India ke staff bol rahe hain ki loan EMI  deduction nahi hone ke liye koi order nahi ahya hain.
KYA HDFC BANK NE BHI PERSONAL LOAN AND CREDIT CARD KI EMI KO MORATORIUM KAR DIYA H FOR 3 MONTHS
What about manna puran finance ltd for two vehicle loan emi’s
How can I get three months loan deferment
As per my bank Abhyudaya co oprative bank Ltd.,  they did not have any circular for private bank circulars for moratorium from RBI,
Kindly do something for this trouble,
Hope you people can help us.
Waiting for your reply.
Thanks
Monitoriun is trap for the customers they r charging u don’t its maximum interest they will charge to u .RBI cheated on they havenot clarify the interest will charged by the bank .it’s helping hand to home customer or any loan so be careful.iasked my bank they told they r going to charge 15 percent
Plzz no Emi 3 mant
Bank RBI Ka aadesh ko nahi manati
Bank is not providing this fasality and cutting interest beware
Citibank charged my emi as usual.
Next 3 manth emi Hero fincorp stopped
Hdfc bank sending messages emi dates…
What aboutHDFC BANK   stand
I have a personnal loan  shall I get the
Prevelage of 3 months moratorium
Tata capital worst services no update on moratorium till now my due date on April 3rd
My due date is 2 april.please reply fast
Hi sir what happened the private bank circulars for deducting of emi please updates karur vysa bank reg of RBI rules is eligible Already the   March month emi deducted but confessions. But some others banks are published.
Hi sir what happened the private bank circulars for deducting of emi please updates karur vysa bank reg of RBI rules is eligible Already the   March month emi deducted but confessions
Didn’t get any useful info in this article..
Kya capital first and home credit Jaisi finance company relaxation provide kar rhi hai
Is car loan extend in hdfc bank
Which bank to be contacted in below said situation:-
PL lending bank is Icici , emi getting debited from salary account with HDFC bank  ?
