Melania Trump recalls Delhi govt’s happiness curriculum to encourage self-care in lockdown
New Delhi: In the midst of the coronavirus pandemic that has led to the deaths of more than 1 lakh people worldwide, US First Lady Melania Trump recalled the happiness curriculum from Delhi government schools and stressed on the importance of self-care during the lockdown.
“While visiting India in February, I was impressed to learn how their schools incorporate happiness into their curriculum.While in unusually challenging times, let’s try to remember to take care of our well-being by taking care of both mind & body,” she tweeted Tuesday, citing a Hindustan Times article.
While visiting India in February, I was impressed to learn how their schools incorporate happiness into their curriculum. While in unusually challenging times, let’s try to remember to take care of our well-being by taking care of both mind & body. https://t.co/1Li0aFiahx
— Melania Trump (@FLOTUS) April 13, 2020

Melania had accompanied US President Donald Trump for a two-day visit to India in February. It was the Trumps’ maiden visit to the country.
Manish Sisodia, deputy chief minister and education minister of Delhi, had announced Sunday that the government’s flagship happiness curriculum will be continued at home in light of the nationwide lockdown.
Sisodia said, “The activities of happiness class would now be conducted at home everyday by the parents. We will support around 8 lakh students and their families to practice mindful meditation from tomorrow with the help of our teachers. It is important to turn the atmosphere positive in our homes and make the families spend quality time together.”
Also read: Tirupur moves from H&M, Tommy Hilfiger, Marks & Spencer to making masks and PPE kits
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
During the Trumps’ two-day visit, Melania had attended a happiness class in a government school of Delhi.
The Delhi government started the happiness curriculum in July 2018. Students in government schools from classes 1-8 spent 45 minutes a day participating in activities such as storytelling, meditation, mindful scribbling and body stretching, to make them happy.
According to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, more than 10,000 cases of Covid-19 and 339 fatalities have been confirmed in the country. This prompted Prime Minster Narendra Modi to extend the nationwide lockdown to 3 May Tuesday.
US has now become the epicentre of the pandemic with more than 5.8 lakh cases and over 23,000 deaths due to the virus.
