Dushyant Singh & Vasundhara Raje, who partied with Kanika Kapoor, test negative for COVID-19
New Delhi: Former Rajasthan Chief Minister Vasundhara Raje and her son Dushyant Singh, who is a BJP MP from Jhalawar-Baran, tested negative for coronavirus Saturday. 
Raje and Singh went into self-isolation after Bollywood singer Kanika Kapoor, whom they met at a party in Lucknow, tested positive for COVID-19.
“My COVID-19 report has come negative. However, as precautionary measure I am currently in self-isolation and am following all health-related advice,” Singh wrote in a tweet. 
मेरी #Covid19 की रिपोर्ट नेगेटिव आई है, लेकिन सावधानी के तौर पर मैं फिलहाल आइसोलेशन में हूं तथा स्वास्थ्य सम्बन्धी सभी निर्देशों का पालन कर रहा हूं।
— Dushyant Singh (@DushyantDholpur) March 21, 2020

Minutes later, Raje also tweeted that she tested negative. 
“After conducting a #COVID-19 test, I’m happy to inform you that the results came back negative. However, as a preventive measure, my son and I will continue to be in isolation for the next two weeks,” she wrote.
मुझे बताते हुए खुशी हो रही है कि #Covid19 टेस्ट की मेरी रिपोर्ट नेगेटिव आई है। हालांकि सावधानी के तौर पर दुष्यंत और मैं अगले दो सप्ताह तक आइसोलेशन में ही रहेंगे।
— Vasundhara Raje (@VasundharaBJP) March 21, 2020

We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
 
The news will perhaps bring some relief to about 100-odd parliamentarians who had come in contact with Singh at a breakfast meeting hosted by President Ram Nath Kovind at Rashtrapati Bhavan on 18 March.
Nearly 100 MPs, including Defence Minister Rajnath Singh, Women and Child Development Minister Smriti Irani, Skill Development Minister Mahender Nath Pandey, Water Resources Minister Gajender Singh Shekhawat and Minister of State for Road Transport V.K. Singh, had attended the breakfast meeting.
Also read: By failing to scale up testing coronavirus, India may have lost crucial time
In India, there are a total 271 cases so far, and four people have died due to the infection so far.
The ‘Baby doll’ fame singer has become the first celebrity to test positive for COVID-19 in India. Kapoor and three others tested positive for the novel coronavirus in Lucknow.
She had returned to Lucknow from London on 11 March and shortly after noted that she had signs of flu. 
In an Instagram post, she said, “For the past 4 days I have had signs of flu, I got myself tested and it came positive for COVID-19. My family and I are in complete quarantine now and following medical advice on how to move forward… I was scanned at the airport as per normal procedure 10 days ago when I came back home, the symptoms have developed only 4 days ago.”
An FIR has been filed against her for negligence and disobedience to the order issued by a public servant.
Also read: Prepare now for the long war against coronavirus
