IAS, IPS officers say 50-70% pay cuts are mere optics, unnecessary and will hit morale
New Delhi: The decision taken by different state governments to cut or defer salaries of government employees in light of the Covid-19 pandemic has stoked resentment among Indian Administrative Service (IAS), Indian Police Service (IPS) and Indian Forest Service (IFS) officers posted there.
While some have dismissed the decision as “mere optics”, others said civil servants didn’t earn enough for the cuts to amount to a significant corpus. They also pointed out that the cuts came on top of the voluntary donations they had made to the PM-CARES fund.
The governments of Maharashtra, Telangana, Rajasthan, Odisha and Andhra Pradesh have announced that all elected representatives as well as most government employees will receive 50-70 per cent less pay in March to aid the battle against Covid-19.
While Maharashtra and Telangana have announced pay cuts, Rajasthan, Odisha and Andhra Pradesh have deferred a portion of salaries (100 per cent of elected representatives’ pay will be deferred in Andhra).
Some states have announced exemptions, including for police and healthcare workers in Rajasthan, and employees below Class III in Maharashtra.
All states have either invoked the impact of Covid-19 on finances or the need to shore up funds to justify the cuts, but several IAS, IPS and IFS officers told ThePrint that the argument didn’t hold water.
“The salary of an IAS officer is no more than Rs 2.5 lakh (a month) even if they are at the most senior level in the state… The average salary is Rs 1.5-1.75 lakh,” said an IAS officer from Rajasthan.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“Even if there are 250 officers in a state like Rajasthan, how much are you actually saving? Rs 5 crore? Add all the IPS and IFS officers’ salaries, and you are not talking more than Rs 10-12 crore.”
An IAS Association office-bearer said senior officers constituted a fraction of staff in both the central government and the states.
“It is the Army, railways and the Central Armed Police Forces on which the government spends a large chunk of its resources… But deferring the salary of senior officers makes for better optics,” the officer said. “However, since it is just deferment, and not a salary cut, it is OK.”
An IFS officer agreed. “This seems like mere optics. The government is incurring expenses of thousands and thousands of crores due to Covid-19… How are they going to change anything by saving even Rs 20 crore?”
Also Read: Akshay Kumar, Virat Kohli, Mukesh Ambani pledge support to PM CARES to help fight Covid-19
The officers pointed out that several associations had come forward to donate thousands and lakhs of rupees to the PM’s Covid-19 fund, which made the cuts seem “unnecessary”.
“We came out ourselves and donated one day’s salaries or more for the fund. Now everyone is wondering what the point is,” the IFS officer quoted above said.
“Is there a financial emergency in the country that the governments are adopting such extreme measures? If there is, then they should come out clean.”
A retired IAS officer who has been re-employed by the government said it was unlikely that such a step had ever been taken in India’s history. “During wars or other emergencies also, such a step was never taken…But again, this is a situation which is as unprecedented as it gets.”
Vikas Yadav, a retired IAS officer of the UP cadre, echoed the claim. “I don’t remember the government taking such a drastic step before, but since civil servants are the most privileged of government staff, such a situation warrants extreme steps.”
An IPS officer from Delhi said the salary cuts had come at a time when government staff across the board was “working tirelessly to contain the spread of the disease”. The officer said they were scared other state and union territory governments across the country may take similar steps.
“Look at police… Our work has gone up manifold since the outbreak,” said the police officer. “Then why are the salaries being cut or deferred? This is bound to have a negative impact on the morale of thousands of officers and staff working in these tough times.”
Also Read: Modi tells Indian envoys to ‘mobilise’ funds for PM-CARES fund to tackle Covid-19
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Cutting out salaries is like cutting our throats …how can we pay our loans and other fixed expenses ….if they will also allow similar benefit to us …….instead of cutting our salaries why don’t govt. Expenses and various allowance given to MLA and mp’s ….the have excess to all facilities for instance super delux room in hospital , super luxury bus seats , business class seats in aeroplanes , rooms in any hotel and many more which are totally free ……..cutting there expense will bring 1000 cr which is far greater than cutting throats of employee ……..if you put scissor on our pocket what about market purchasing capacity it will be totally destroyed also after govt. Same salary cuts will be seen in private sector too as they will get a nice opportunity and you will witness a mass number of suicides through out country and it will also effect businesses to because purchasing capacity will suffer ……1 day salary cut for entire year is what a govt. Employee can afford …….we have education loans to pay ,housing loans to pay ,car loans to pay ,school fees , college’s fees ,rent of accomodations ,medical bills who will pay them ……
government should not cut salaries of anybody. and instead of it they can cut allowances and area fund given to mla and mp and by cutting their allowances and subsidy govt will earn at least 1000 caror in each state. and there is no need to cut salaries of even mp and mla and salary is only small fraction of expenditure incurred on them. and their salary should be taxable as all govy ser having salaries above 10 lakh are paying 30 per ent tax already and same shold be done for politisians too. all high grade employee already pay salaries equal to 2 month in tax form at least.and mgnarega fund which is never utilised fully in last 5 year and currently not utilised due to lockdown should be utilised. it will give enough money in vovt hand. And this is time where extra payment shold be given to employees of essensial services whether medical or police or anyone else to motivate them. mp mla area dev fund should be utilised in corona containment. if even sfter that if yhere is finansial emegency then pay cut shold be for those whose department are not working due to lock down not to those who are working extra hours
I always think indian railways spends 2 much on it’s employees just think at the time of diwali they give 70 days salary to them, and look at the condition of trains.. All the govt department who is not working… Their salary should be cut to half considering their grades and overall monthly pay…
I am a railway employee do you have idea how much we get bonus every year it is 18000/- to 19000/- Only. Its not 70 days salary my salary is 35,000/-(+)  if i get 70 days bonus i have to get 80,000/- (+) .please make sure u know about the matter before u post on social platform. Everyday railwaymen work day & night to make sure u have no powercuts in ur homes by transporting coal.u get food in ur plate by transporting grains fertilizers etc. If you ride a bike the petrol or diesel in your car comes to you through railways. If you want  go to a destination hundreds of kms away ecnomically railways are best option. If the security of this country wants power like guns tanks various defence materials and army men transported through railways. UR medicines also transported. U can’t just go on commenting if you have no Idea about THE life line of the country “INDIAN RAILWAYS “
During crisis situation, everybody ( president to watchman) have to make sacrifices depending on their salary and perks.  One doesn’t need more than 20000 to survive even in the costliest city.  If they are not happy with the pay cuts, then let them say quits and look for some Pvt sector job.
Why does your portal always search for every thing negative in whatever happens in India. I watch your news for amusement as to how a group of people and media remain pessimistic in the best of worst  situationssituations. Congrats on your unbeatability. I still want to read you for amusement.
Why have you not added Kerala?
Salary is only icing on the cake for most of them. But it is not the time to point fingers when effort of everyone is needed.
I totally agree with you. It’s a joke that some of them say that in any case, they do not earn enough. Did they join for salary only? However, there is a fraction of them which will be honest and honest will never have any problem in spite of pay cut because they minimize their requirement, anyway.
Wow great decision by these officers before getting into selection they say we serve for the people and nation once get into selection just forget thoose words wow india needs these type of officers these should awarded  They have no right to be in that post.
Wow great decision by these officers before getting into selection they say we serve for the people and nation once get into selection just forget thoose words wow india needs these type of officers these should awarded shame on these officers. They have no right to be in that post.
This is unfortunate that an IAS officer, arguing about their economic crisis at the same time our country is suffering from the same problem, but they were in their personal problems.. If they required much amount of money they had not to Waste their talent in civil services because it the work of people… I had chosen this profession for well-being of my society and country.. I hope they will also understand the circumstances of country.
Good these IAS and IPS earns in crore….out of 100 only 1 will be that honest who spend his life only in salary all bloody our corrupt big time…..so good step by govt…infact their salary should be reduced to half for at least 6 months….they r here to serve people…..now imagine how easily they do corruption…greedy souls…selfish…
Good these IAS and IPS earns in crore….out of 100 only 1 will be that honest who spend his life only in salary all bloody our corrupt big time…..so good step by govt…infact their salary should be reduced to half for at least 6 months….they r here to serve people…how easy they forget moment money comes…now imagine how easily they do corruption…greedy souls…selfish…
In present situation , these officers are the only ones working non stop , to ensure that lockdown and isolation works so that lives could be saved , by taking grave risk of infection themselves , therefore cutting their salary does not make sense at this stage , these people too have a family to feed and provide other necessities , taking their income is immoral and inhuman .
The economy of the country is not strengthened by knee jerk policies of deducting the employees salary.  No organization should have the right to do so.  I am unable to understand the concept of PM Cares fund.  How will it be disbursed and to whom.  PM RELIEF FUND, CM relief fund, disaster management fund there is an attempt to start so many parallel allocation of funds
Most of the civil servants have accepted in personal interview after selection that they left billions package for serve nation and her people. They are motivated by service rather than salary now what happened service spirit disappear very early in career now prefrence is money. This is shameful.
Most of the civil servants have accepted in personal interview after selection that they left billions package for serve nation and her people. They are motivated by service rather than salary now what happened service spirit disappear very early in career now prefrence is money. This is shameful.
I think no salary be drawn to All India Services officer.They are privileged group and have facilities too.
People enjoying best of power and privileges cant spare few thousands,  they are complaining like daily wage earners,
It’s disgusting and shameful for the IAS & IPS to crib on the pay cut. They have all the comforts of life and yet are suggesting to curb the expenses of the Armed and para military Forces. 
The Armed and Para Military Forces are doing a great job and without them , can these blue eyed boys born with silver spoon in service enjoy the perks ? The high amount of salary they get alongwith perks is not equal to the job they perform unlike other Corporates.
Salary cut by the State Government 50-70% of IAS, IPS and other Central Government’s Officers can not be welcome except in a severe financial Emergency. During acute critical situation arising out of COVID-19, all those Officers and also lower level officers, personnel are renderings manifolds duties over their capacity even.
Under the circumstances, all those State Governments should review and reconsideration further before any final decision.
All Contributions should be Volunteering offers to PM Cares Fund for COVID-19.
