Subramanian Swamy writes to PM Modi over COVID-19, says economic relief package crucial
New Delhi: BJP Rajya Sabha MP Subramanian Swamy has written to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, collating measures announced by 17 countries and two central banks to tackle the coronavirus pandemic.
In the letter, Swamy said the “package of economic relief is very crucial at this stage and that is why I have enclosed what the other countries have done for your information and appraisal”.
Check out Dr. Swamy’s Letter to PM 2020-03-20 on Scribd: @Scribd ReadMore https://t.co/WCUYIOzVYL
— Subramanian Swamy (@Swamy39) March 20, 2020

 
The letter, dated 20 March, comes at a time when PM Modi has announced the constitution of an economic response task force led by Union Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman to deal with the fallout of the COVID-19 crisis on the Indian economy. 
The task force is yet to be constituted, although the finance ministry has started the consultative process with the Reserve Bank of India and other ministries to address the woes of the worst-hit sectors like aviation and hospitality, and micro, small and medium enterprises.
According to the latest official figures, 271 people have tested positive for coronavirus so far.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: Subramanian Swamy: On economy, Modi relies on friends & ministers who don’t tell him truth
Swamy has listed the measures taken by countries like the US, France, Germany, the UK, Japan, China and South Korea, and institutions like the International Monetary Fund and European Central Bank to fight the pandemic.
Many countries have announced massive economic rescue packages to prevent the onset of recession amidst a halt in economic activity and job losses across various sectors.
The steps announced by countries and listed by Swamy included the US’s decision to provide a bailout to the airlines industry and the $1,000 payouts to most citizens and sops to small businesses, France’s announcement of social security tax cuts and unemployment benefits, Japan’s and Canada’s loans to small businesses, Hong Kong’s $1,200 cash subsidy to permanent residents and South Korea’s package that provides funding for healthcare costs and support to small enterprises.
Swamy also tweeted Saturday morning, wondering if declaration of an economic emergency is inevitable.
Is now declaration of Economic Emergency becoming inevitable? Govt must put doubts at rest
— Subramanian Swamy (@Swamy39) March 21, 2020

Swamy, a known finance minister aspirant, has always been critical of the handling of the economy by PM Modi and Sitharaman.
Earlier this year, Swamy said that Modi does not understand economics and that the PM should make him the finance minister.
Swamy was also critical of former finance minister Arun Jaitley during his tenure and attacked him on several occasions.
Also read: ‘Why no autopsy on Gandhiji’s body’ — BJP MP Swamy calls for new probe into Mahatma killing
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
1.When there is a crisis,leaders must take lead.Why not govt{Hon.Prime Minister} think of drastically reducing salary and perquisites of M.Ps,M.L.As and Ministers.Reduce the salary of bureaucrats {cash Payments to a maximum of Rs.1– 1.5 lakhs per month}and give the balance as bonds redeemable after 5 years with FD interest. It will enthuse the common man and they will whole heatedly participate in the projects implementation.
Invest more in Rural development by ADOPTING Villages, Develop Khadi industry and exports,Create jobs by sincerely and seriously implementing “Skill development” programme and linking it “Make in India”.Entrust these to a competent technocrats and PMO to monitor quarterly basis.
