All Delhi students from nursery to class 8 to be promoted, says Manish Sisodia
New Delhi: The AAP government in Delhi Monday said all students from nursery to class 8 will be promoted in both government and private schools in the national capital.
Deputy Chief Minister and Education Minister Manish Sisodia said this was being done under the no-detention policy of the Right to Education Act in the larger interest of children as schools remain shut due to the coronavirus lockdown.
The no-detention policy states that no student can be failed or expelled from school until the completion of elementary education covering classes 1 to 8.
As for students above class 8, the minister said a decision will be taken after consultations with the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE).
Schools and educational institutions across Delhi, and the country, have been closed due to the all-India lockdown that was announced by the Prime Minister last Tuesday.
Also read: What the Delhi school education model is and why Maharashtra is looking to emulate it
Addressing a digital press conference along with CM Arvind Kejriwal, Sisodia said the Delhi government will begin online classes of two subjects for students set to begin Class 12 in the new academic year. Those registering for the classes will be provided monetary help to buy data packs, he added.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Messages via SMS/IVR will be sent to parents for daily activities as is already being done in some schools in Maharashtra. “If necessary, (we) will also start classes on television channels,” Sisodia said.
Apart from measures for schools, Kejriwal also announced that essentials will be provided to those without ration cards and arrangements are being made to facilitate this. “The process is being streamlined to ensure the distribution can take place in two to four days,” he said.
Also read: This is how Modi govt plans to resume classes in schools in April despite lockdown
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Sir
       My son on class nursery. He is only 3 year and 7 month. School may be submitted fee of the month of April. 
But sir 3 year and 7 month children how to learn online class. He is not properly study at school. So how to study at home.. And why given total fee of month. At least half fee of the month pay. 
It can be use for the pay of teacher pay… Only….
