Tata Trusts commits Rs 500 cr for Covid-19 crisis as positive cases rise in India
New Delhi: With the number of Covid-19 cases on the rise in India and its rapid spread across most of the states, Tata Trusts Saturday pledged Rs 500 crore for the vulnerable and the needy by way of providing medical devices and other facilities.   
“In this exceptionally difficult period, I believe that urgent emergency resources need to be deployed to cope with the needs of fighting the COVID-19 crisis, which is one of the toughest challenges the human race will face,” Ratan Tata, Chairman, Tata Trusts, said in a statement Saturday. 
The COVID 19 crisis is one of the toughest challenges we will face as a race. The Tata Trusts and the Tata group companies have in the past risen to the needs of the nation. At this moment, the need of the hour is greater than any other time. pic.twitter.com/y6jzHxUafM
— Ratan N. Tata (@RNTata2000) March 28, 2020

The funds donated by Tata Trusts are to be utilized in various ways: personal protective equipment for medical personnel on the frontlines of the crisis, respiratory systems for treatment, testing kits to increase testing, setting up modular treatment facilities for infected patients and for knowledge management and training of health workers and the general public, he said in a statement.  
“The Tata Trusts and the Tata group companies have in the past risen to the needs of the nation. At this moment, the need of the hour is greater than any other time,” Ratan Tata added.   
Also read: Not apologetic about comments, migrant workers putting lives at risk: ex-BJP MP Balbir Punj
Tata also said Tata Trusts, Tata Sons and the Tata group companies will be united in fighting the crisis along with its local and global partners by joining hands with the government “on a united public health collaboration platform which will strive to reach out to sections that are underprivileged and deprived”.  
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
He expressed his gratitude and respect for “every person of member organizations who have risked their life and safety to fight this pandemic”.  
This comes at a time when the number of active Covid-19 cases in India have reached 819, according to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
Also read: GDP growth could slip to zero or negative due to lockdown: NITI Aayog VC Rajiv Kumar 
