IAS, IPS, IRS create CARUNA to shadow and aid Modi govt’s Covid-19 efforts
New Delhi: Civil servants across services have created a platform called the Civil Services Association Reach to Support National Disasters, or simply CARUNA, to assist the government in its Covid-19 efforts.
The platform — which includes officers from the Indian Administrative Service (IAS), Indian Police Service (IPS), Indian Foreign Service (IFS), Indian Revenue Service (IRS), state services and so on — was launched by the IAS Association vice-president Sanjeev Chopra Friday.
“We are here to assist, support and supplement the government efforts with regard to coronavirus using our networks, skills, resources, etc.,” Chopra told ThePrint. “Since civil servants are spread out across the country, this network can be used to create a database of information on migration, essential supplies and medical equipment like masks, ventilators, PPE, etc,” he added.
“Obviously, this is no alternative to what the government is doing, but if officers across the country can collaborate their efforts, then why not?” said another official who did not want to be named.
The official added that this is especially important since, at the district level, shortages of supplies are being felt. “… So it was felt that officers should use their network and resources to assist the government,” the official said.
Also read: IAS has emerged as India’s steel frame of resistance against coronavirus
The officers have set up teams in sync with the 11 empowered groups created by the Narendra Modi government to tackle all issues related to the Covid-19 outbreak.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“We have assigned different officers depending on their domain expertise for each area and they will be responsible for preparing the platform’s response to the outbreak,” the official said.
The teams will assist the government in specific areas like medical emergency management plan, availability of hospitals, isolations and quarantine facilities, disease surveillance and testing and critical care training.
These teams are also working on supporting availability of essential medical equipment such as masks, gloves and ventilators, augmenting human resources, facilitating supply chain and logistics for necessary items such as food and medicine, and also working on economic and welfare measures, information dissemination, public awareness, technology and data management issues relating to the lockdown.
Also read: Why India’s wealthy happily donate to god and govt but loathe helping needy and poor
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
