FIR against two Vietnamese nationals for ‘spitting’ inside elevator of Mangaluru apartment
Bengaluru: The Mangaluru Police have registered a case Friday against two Vietnamese nationals living in the city after CCTV footage purportedly showed one of them spitting in a lift of a housing complex.
Mangaluru Police Commissioner Dr P.S. Harsha told ThePrint the two Vietnamese were kept under quarantine until 14 April as they had gone to Vietnam as part of their cashew export business.
“In a very deliberate manner, they have spit inside the lift and at the telephone handle inside the lift. Preliminary investigation and the CCTV footage that has been provided by the Resident Welfare Association has been directed at the same. We are investigating and questioning them as to why they did it,” Harsha told this reporter over phone.
Soon after the incident that took place Friday, panic-stricken residents of the complex requested the police to immediately shift five Vietnamese nationals, including the two men who have been booked, to a government quarantine facility. All these five nationals were staying together in the housing complex.
“There are five members in the family and all of them have been moved to a government hospital. We have made no arrests till now, we are just questioning them and the motive behind this act,” said a senior police official.
Police Commissioner Harsha said they have registered a case, and all the residents who are concerned and want to be tested will be shifted to a government hospital.
The police are, however, yet to take a call on whether the residents will be tested for Covid -19.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: In its fight against coronavirus panic, Karnataka govt finds unlikely ally in Telegram app
According to the CCTV footage in possession with the police, one of the Vietnamese is purportedly seen taking the lift phone and spitting on it.
The police FIR was lodged on the basis of the complaint filed by the secretary of the apartment association after residents found “cough spit” in the lift. 
According to the FIR, the residents observed “around 1523 hours on April 17, 2020, one of the residents living in the flat number… was found to have done the act. The resident is a foreign national and was under quarantine till recently. The complaint further stated that the resident removed the mask when he entered the lift and spit on the lift wall…”
Speaking to ThePrint, the secretary of the association Subhash Chandra said five Vietnamese nationals — three men and two women — lived together in the apartment complex, which has 360 flats and nearly 1,200 residents.
“We immediately sealed the lift and called the police. The residents are worried after this incident. It has caused a scare among them. We have requested the police to take action after thorough investigation,” Chandra added.
Also read: Power struggle between two top ministers adds to Karnataka’s coronavirus troubles
