67% Indians blame China for Covid-19, 50% say calling it ‘Chinese virus’ not racist: Survey
New Delhi: An online survey conducted by The Takshashila Institution has found that a majority of Indians think China was responsible for the coronavirus pandemic. A significant number of them also feel calling the illness a “Chinese virus” or “Wuhan virus” wasn’t racist or stigmatised.
The survey was carried out by Manoj Kewalramani, fellow, China Studies, at The Takshashila Institution, on how people perceived China after the Covid-19 crisis.
Conducted from 26 March to 3 April, it had 1,299 respondents — 1,156 Indians, and the rest of them were from US, Canada and even China.
Around 67 per cent of the total respondents believed that China was responsible for the Covid-19 outbreak. Out of these, 48 per cent said China failed to stop illegal wildlife trade, contain an early outbreak of the contagious illness and had “lied” to the world.
Around 18 per cent also believed coronavirus could be a biological weapon created by China.
More than 50 per cent of Indians in the survey said calling the illness a “Chinese virus” was needed to make sure the neighbouring country didn’t escape responsibility.
Also read: Over 60% migrants don’t know govt measures in place for them to deal with lockdown: Survey
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Around 65 per cent of those who participated in the survey thought China’s policies in containing the coronavirus outbreak were “draconian and opaque”.
They also believed that the Chinese government has hidden the true scale of the crisis. Only 3 per cent said China has provided a model for others to contain the outbreak and displayed the strength of its governance system.
China has been supplying masks, ventilators and other protective gear to other countries affected by the pandemic. On Sunday, the country donated 1,000 ventilators to the US.
Around 56 per cent of respondents in the survey, however, believed China’s gesture towards other countries was “nothing but geopolitics”. According to the survey, these respondents said China’s actions were only an opportunity to project its power over other nations.
A majority of the participants also didn’t think China was a threat to India. Close to 50 per cent admitted that both countries shared a complex relationship and common interests.
Also read: This is the ‘Bhilwara model’ Modi govt is looking to use across India to fight Covid-19
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
