IIT-Delhi offers help to alumni studying abroad where colleges have been shut amid COVID-19
New Delhi: The Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Delhi, has reached out to its alumni studying in Europe and US universities to help them find accommodation in the wake of several educational institutes shutting down due to coronavirus scare.
The effort is intended for those who might have been stranded or are unable to find an accommodation after they were asked to vacate university or college hostels.
The IIT-Delhi Thursday tweeted, asking its alumni to contact the institute through official channel and said they would try to arrange accommodation with the help of their alumni network.
“This message is intended for those recent alumni of IIT Delhi who are doing higher studies in the US or other foreign universities. A large number of universities in the US and Europe have closed down and students may have been asked to vacate their dormitories. If you are struggling to find accommodation and facing problems, please write to ‘deanaaip@iitd.ac.in‘. We shall try to locate senior alumni close to you who may be willing to help you at this time,” the tweet by the official handle of IIT-Delhi read.
If you are struggling to find accommodation and facing problems, please write to 'deanaaip@iitd.ac.in'. We shall try to locate senior alumni close to you who may be willing to help you at this time.
— IIT Delhi (@iitdelhi) March 19, 2020

The tweet also added a word of caution.
“Since we will be requesting other alumni to help you, please ping to us only if you really need the help.” 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The message of help sent out by Dean, Alumni Affairs, IIT-Delhi Sanjeev Sanghi has been shared on other social media platforms such as Facebook as well.
Also read: IIT Delhi, DU, JNU, Jamia suspend classes, IIMs put off convocation as COVID-19 cases rise
With the increasing number of COVID-19 cases in Delhi and other parts of the country, the institute was quick to implement precautionary measures on its campus. 
Director V. Ramagopal Rao on 12 March announced suspension of classes until 31 March and on 18 March, another circular was issued, asking all students to vacate hostels at the “earliest”. 
“With multiple train and flight cancellations, it will not be possible for you to vacate after a few days,” the circular had stated.
Also read: How countries worst hit by coronavirus are effecting lockdowns to deal with the pandemic
