One night after Shab-e-Barat, Imran Khan tweets greetings, deletes after he is called out
New Delhi: Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan was left embarrassed after it was pointed out that he was late by a day to extend his Shab-e-Barat greetings.
On 9 April, Thursday, Khan took to twitter to “request Muslims all over the world to offer prayers”.
“I would request Muslims all over the world to offer tonight, on the occasion of Shab-e-Barat special nuafil prayers to Allah and seek his blessings and forgiveness,” he had tweeted.
While Shab-e-Barat was celebrated on the night of 9 April in some parts of the world, it was celebrated in Pakistan on 8 April itself.
Some users trolled Khan for being “late as usual”, while others accused him of “having no knowledge of Islam”.
Shab-e-Baraat was last night, requests for prayers the next night. Inka sirf sabun he slow nahin, chand bhi slow hai. pic.twitter.com/j0xAYrTWYe
— Naila Inayat नायला इनायत (@nailainayat) April 9, 2020

Trump hacked ur acct ,right??
Shab e barat was yesterday night..
— Serial Chiller (@_serialchilller) April 9, 2020
Pakistan Prime Minister requesting Muslims to pray for an event today that already took place last night. This is the Prime Minister of Islamic Republic of Pakistan who has no knowledge of Islam or even normal festivals and rituals. Either no knowledge or it’s good quality weed. pic.twitter.com/VdY0ZsDdsd
— Aditya Raj Kaul (@AdityaRajKaul) April 9, 2020

We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
And he is again late. Business as-usual. May ALLAH Pak have mercy on us. https://t.co/NXGX0ZU3Jh
— Alinaa (@AlinaaPK) April 9, 2020

After being heavily trolled for his gaffe, Khan deleted his tweet just hours after posting it.
Also read: ‘First quiet Shab-e-Barat, but for right reasons’: Delhi Muslims mark prayer night indoors
Shab-e-Barat or ‘the night of forgiveness’ is observed on the night between day 14 and 15 of Sha’ban — the eighth month of the Islamic calendar, which was on 8 April this year.
Muslims observe the occasion by going to mosques and graveyards to pray for the departed loved ones. At several places, streets and homes are illuminated to mark the occasion.
However, this time around, owing to the lockdown and social distancing rules in place due to the coronavirus pandemic, Muslims across the world spent the night praying inside their homes. In India too, Muslims celebrated a largely sombre Shab-e-Barat by not stepping out of their homes.
In Pakistan too, the police and the government imposed restrictions on gatherings at graveyards for Shab-e-Barat.
Also read: Shab-e-Barat, the night of forgiveness Muslims will be celebrating indoors this year
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
I am surprised to see negative comments pouring in from non- Muslims and our neighbors…well it is just a mistake as he is a human being not a machine.
Plus he as a leader has a lot on his shoulders and not like any time wasters like us all here staying at home in such a crisis and still having all the negative vibes and time.
We only expect freaken machines not to make any such errors /mistakes…
Yes. Entire muslims community should ask pardon from Allaha for following Mullahs Islam and should embrace its original religion that is of Hinduism since 1500 years. Muslim products are criminals terrorist and inhuman to human being and animals
True. Only beasts are produced. Not human beings
Like a drunk fool
Spread peace… Not violence. @theprint
You are stupid “the author”
It is no big thing to know his knowledge is below his knees…
The Print doesn’t spare Pakistan too!
There is nothing called shab e baraat , it’s a innovation and performing prayer or doing any act of worship considering this night as a night of superiority is biddah
Imran khan as a PM should not encourage such unislamic practice and people criticising him of not having Islamic knowledge themselves are ignorant even after being in muslim country they are ignorant of Islam it’s a matter of serious concern.
Blaming Imran khan for being ignorant and tolerating unislamic corrupt  Bhutto nawaz musharaff etc is also joke
You are right
It is a pity that even his honest intentions are mocked. Pak does not deserve a leader like him.
We need serious lock down, but the public will not agree. So we need full three weeks curfew all over Indian. Only supermarkets should supply the order placed for raw food items, three weeks curfew will break the cycle of virus..
Places where there is no Malls then approved vender (not positive for
virus) should be on the road for two hour ,not standing at single point to sell ,they should be moving from one to other place to sell the veges. People should stay at home when call is there they should come one by one to buy necessary things ,but not to board for weeks and weeks.%percent curfew will surely be the control  of virus.
Ohhh…
So Indian Con/Orthodoxy’s favourable Pakistani journo, even Ms Naila is indulgent?
At least he’s following the “IST”! Cut him some slack°.
A bloody boot lockers Pakistani dose not know what is sabay barat. He knows to lick the boots of britishers.
Ur name is enough to describe ur personality
India ki koi news nahi arahi Hai ?
So what do you expect from a selected PM who follows not the Islamic calendar dates but the dates from Pinki Peerni’s calendar?  And  what do you expect from a PM infested with drugs  all the time since his so called great DHARNA days.  
Ask Makhdoom Javed Hashmi and he would definitely tell you the whole story.  I doubt he knows the date and day when he wakes up in the morning the next day.  Thanx to our military establishment specially General Bajwa who brought such a stupid menace upon the whole Pakistani nation.
No commendations for Hindus who celebrated Navratri indoors?? Also Ram Naumi indoors??
So he wasn’t “commending”, “genius”!
Also, I didn’t knew that dates of Navaraatri in Pakistan vary from the Indian date by more than half-a-year!
As I indicated: “What a genius”, indeed.
Prime minister Mr. Imran Khan Captain I Asia. remains all time busy with his work as we all can see his dedicacy during these harsh conditions…due his overload of work for the welfare of Pakistan he forgot to wish the people on Shabi baraat…there are some feku Ministers rather PM s who remain busy with creating polarization in thier nations and enjoy how poor people of there nation dies during this lock down suituation.
I salute PM Imran Khan for his hard work.
