Janata curfew will strengthen fight against COVID-19, PM Modi tweets before it begins
New Delhi: Minutes before the ‘janata curfew’ proposed by him in his television address to the nation Thursday was to begin, Prime Minister Narendra Modi tweeted Sunday that the move would add “tremendous strength to the fight” against COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2.
“In a few minutes from now, the #JantaCurfew commences. Let us all be a part of this curfew, which will add tremendous strength to the fight against COVID-19 menace. The steps we take now will help in the times to come,” his tweet said.
In a few minutes from now, the #JantaCurfew commences. 
Let us all be a part of this curfew, which will add tremendous strength to the fight against COVID-19 menace. The steps we take now will help in the times to come. 
Stay indoors and stay healthy. #IndiaFightsCorona pic.twitter.com/11HJsAWzVf
— Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 22, 2020

The number of COVID-19 cases rose to 315 in India Saturday.
Also read: What the word ‘curfew’ means & how janata curfew isn’t literally one
The ‘janata curfew’, to be observed from 7am to 9pm, was announced on 19 March, as PM Modi sought to calm nerves and urged Indians to remain indoors as much as possible.
“Under ‘janata curfew’, no one will go out of their houses. It will also prepare us for the forthcoming days,” he had said, hinting towards this being a drill for similar future measures.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The day, he said, would act as a symbol of “our self-control”, and the experience would prepare the country for coming challenges.
In view of the curfew, everything except businesses and government establishments dealing in essential items and services will remain shut. No metro trains will be functioning in Delhi, Benglauru and other cities, while long-distance and suburban trains will also not commence. Those trains already running will, however, not be stopped. As for air travel, several airlines have announced that they will either operate in minimum capacity or cancel all flights.
Also read: ‘Janata curfew’ is a public drill, won’t really stop spread of coronavirus: Experts
In his speech, PM Modi had also said that at 5pm Sunday, state authorities will, through a siren, alert people to come out to their doorsteps or balconies to express gratitude to those who have been providing essential services during this worldwide health crisis.
He appealed to people to clap, clang instruments or ring bells for five minutes to show their appreciation for those working in essential service sectors.
“India is grateful to them, and citizens should express their gratitude to these people on Sunday,” the PM had said.
Also read: Janata curfew is Modi’s 2nd stab at social mobilisation, but it can be a double-edged sword
 
