COVID-19: Macron’s ‘sanskaari’ habit, Bollywood nostalgia & how to get sick leave
New Delhi: Scared and concerned about the coronavirus pandemic, humour came to the rescue of many on Twitter in these stressful times.
To begin with, how the virus affects routine life — and provides us plenty of space.
never seen BOM airport this empty at 1:00am #COVID19india pic.twitter.com/OqitAv7WTf
— miten sampat (@miten) March 11, 2020

But as US TV talk show star, Ellen DeGeneres found out, it’s not only routine life the dreaded virus has infected.
I have some news. For now, I’ll be shooting my show with no studio audience. To everyone who was looking forward to coming, I'm so sorry. But I’m doing this for the health of my fans, my staff & my crew. (It has nothing to do with a warrant for my arrest in the state of Florida.)
— Ellen DeGeneres (@TheEllenShow) March 12, 2020

On the brighter side, Ambassador of France to India shares one specific sanskari habit President Emmanuel Macron picked up during his visit here.
Président Macron has decided to greet all his counterparts with a namaste, a graceful gesture that he has retained from his India visit in 2018 pic.twitter.com/OksoKjW7V8
— Emmanuel Lenain (@FranceinIndia) March 11, 2020

We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
And, you can always depend on Bollywood to the rescue us with some nostalgia.
every country right now pic.twitter.com/37zoOsPRTv
— Akshar (@AksharPathak) March 12, 2020

Biocon chairperson Kiran Mazumdar Shaw might just be the best boss in the country. Here’s her advice on how to apply for leave in these corona times…
A perfect Leave Application
Dear HRI am suffering from corona virus and request you to grant me paid leave for 20days. Otherwise I will come to office ………😂😂😂
— Kiran Mazumdar Shaw (@kiranshaw) March 12, 2020

Who knew it’d take a deadly virus to teach our leaders – even Donald Trump — that at the end of the day, we’re all equal?
Someone needs to tell the Democrats in Congress that CoronaVirus doesn’t care what party you are in. We need to protect ALL Americans!
— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 11, 2020

No means Yes! Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s helpful advisory on coronavirus to citizens and his council of ministers.
Say No to Panic, Say Yes to Precautions.
No Minister of the Central Government will travel abroad in the upcoming days. I urge our countrymen to also avoid non-essential travel. 
We can break the chain of spread and ensure safety of all by avoiding large gatherings.
— Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 12, 2020

Badminton player Parupalli Kashyap sends an SOS to Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan, far away from Birmingham, UK.
Sir @drharshvardhan we are in Birmingham for a tournament and we are not sure about our situation considering the health advisory issued yesterday. Can we please speak to you urgently? .@NSaina @srikidambi @pranaav6 @sikkireddy @bwfmedia @YonexAllEngland
— Parupalli Kashyap (@parupallik) March 12, 2020

Here’s a completely unnecessary and disappointing comparison by mythologist and author Devdutt Pattnaik.
Isn’t social distancing same as untouchability ?
— Devdutt Pattanaik (@devduttmyth) March 12, 2020

Australian fires, communal riots, war mongering and now a pandemic: No wonder late night comedian Stephen Colbert feels the way he does…
What I wouldn't give for a dull moment.
— Stephen Colbert (@StephenAtHome) March 12, 2020

Engineer and SpaceX CEO Elon Musk, has completely different advice about what to do about the coronavirus crisis — and it’s literally out of this world.
pic.twitter.com/IXSO7Ko4z7
— Elon Musk (@elonmusk) March 11, 2020

Lastly, in another world, Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein got 23 years in jail for sexual misconduct. Hollywood actors Reese Witherspoon and Mira Sorvino, who also accused him of harassment, herald his sentence.
A historical moment today. I am so appreciative of the women and men who spoke up about the abuse and harassment they suffered at the hands of Harvey Weinstein.
— Reese Witherspoon (@ReeseW) March 11, 2020

23 years. Harvey Weinstein has been sentenced to 23 years in prison for his crimes of rape and sexual assault. I literally cried tears of amazement, gratitude that the justice system has worked on behalf of all of his victims today.
— Mira Sorvino (@MiraSorvino) March 11, 2020
