Hand washing is a luxury — govt should give soaps to urban poor during the Covid-19 crisis
Over the last five years, central and state governments have invested in improving access to sanitation across rural and urban India. The next five years are dedicated to increasing in-house water connections. Despite such laudable efforts and significant investments, informal settlements continue to fall outside the ambit of these programmes, owing to tenurial roadblocks and inadequacy of space.
These circumstances, emerging from past policy failures, make mitigation of Covid-19 risks through age-old public health measures of improved hand hygiene and social distancing in dense underprovided informal settlements near impractical, and need our urgent attention.
While over five dozen drug makers and universities across the globe, such as Sanofi, Johnson & Johnson and Moderna Inc., are racing to develop a vaccine for long-term resilience, most experts agree that it would take between 12–18 months before it is available for emergency use. Given this timeframe, the Narendra Modi government must contemplate giving emergency water and sanitation assistance in slums by expanding the application of the Disaster Management Act, 2005. The government must exercise collaboration and flexibility to avoid a “notified disaster” turning into a “multi-dimensional public health emergency” beyond the nation’s current management capacities.
Also Read: Surging soap demand makes Hindustan Unilever India’s best stock
Indian governments have substantial experience in providing emergency water and sanitation in both post-disaster situations and for mega-events. After the floods in Kerala in 2018, the government provided massive water and sanitation assistance to the affected communities through new water and mobile sewage treatment units along with family hygiene kits. Rapid delivery of infrastructure has taken place even during mega-events, such as the 2019 Kumbh Mela in Uttar Pradesh’s Prayagraj, when an additional 120,000 toilet blocks and water kiosks were set up. A similar approach should be adopted for highly vulnerable slum settlements through:
Also Read: Hand washing to stop coronavirus — 78% of toilets in Mumbai slums lack reliable water supply
Also Read: ‘Use toilet’ — Amitabh Bachchan quotes Lancet to warn coronavirus could spread from excreta
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Safely managed WASH services not only form an essential part of preventing and protecting human health from the Covid-19 pandemic, but will remain critical during the recovery phase to mitigate secondary impacts on community livelihoods and well-being.
As currently being witnessed in Singapore, with the recent rise in the number of positive Covid-19 cases in worker dormitories and past epidemic outbreaks like Ebola, low-income settlements can serve as grounds for emerging and re-emerging communicable diseases. Thus, for India, it would be critical to incorporate intra-urban spatial and water and sanitation infrastructure disparities, while designing a comprehensive mitigation strategy.
The opportunity in this crisis is to correct WASH inequalities in the cities. This will not only protect against immediate vulnerabilities but also act as a long-lasting urban public health strategy against any future epidemics.
Shubhagato Dasgupta is a senior fellow, Anindita Mukherjee is a senior researcher, and Neha Agarwal is a research associate at the Centre for Policy Research, New Delhi. Views are personal.
