MP Dushyant met President, went to Parliament after attending party with COVID-19 patient
New Delhi: Rajasthan’s Jhalawar-Baran MP Dushyant Singh met President Ram Nath Kovind and 100-odd parliamentarians on 18 March, two days after he attended a party in Lucknow with Bollywood singer Kanika Kapoor who has now tested positive for the coronavirus.
Singh is currently in self-quarantine, as is his mother and former Rajasthan chief minister Vasundhara Raje who was also present at the party.
Bollywood singer Kanika Kapoor is the first celebrity in India to test positive for COVID-19.
Nearly 100 MPs, including Defence Minister Rajnath Singh, Women and Child Development Minister Smriti Irani, Skill Development Minister Mahender Nath Pandey, Water Resources Minister Gajender Singh Shekhawat and Minister of State for Road Transport V.K. Singh, were at the Rashtrapati Bhavan on 18 March to attend a breakfast meeting hosted by the President.
A Rashtrapati Bhawan spokesman confirmed that Dushyant Singh had attended the meeting Wednesday.
Singh had even tweeted a photograph after attending the breakfast meeting with Kovind.
“Attended breakfast hosted by Hon’ble President Kovind ji along with Members of Parliament from Uttar Pradesh & Rajasthan at Rashtrapati Bhavan this morning,” Singh had posted.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Attended breakfast hosted by Hon’ble President Kovind ji along with Members of Parliament from Uttar Pradesh & Rajasthan at Rashtrapati Bhavan this morning.
आज माननीय राष्ट्रपति जी द्वारा राजस्थान व उत्तरप्रदेश के सांसदों के साथ राष्ट्रपति भवन में आयोजित बैठक में हिस्सा लिया। pic.twitter.com/qEITrLWk2L
— Dushyant Singh (@DushyantDholpur) March 18, 2020

Soon after Kanika Kapoor disclosed Friday that she tested positive for coronavirus, Singh’s mother and former Rajasthan CM Vasundhara Raje tweeted that she had quarantined herself.
“While in Lucknow, I attended a dinner with my son Dushyant & his in-laws. Kanika, who has unfortunately tested positive for #Covid19, was also present there as a guest,” she posted, adding, “…my son and I have immediately self-quarantined and we’re taking all necessary precautions.”
While in Lucknow, I attended a dinner with my son Dushyant & his in-laws. Kanika, who has unfortunately tested positive for #Covid19 was also a guest.
As a matter of abundant caution, my son & I have immediately self-quarantined and we’re taking all necessary precautions.
— Vasundhara Raje (@VasundharaBJP) March 20, 2020

President Kovind has recently started the practice of inviting MPs over breakfast.
Over half-a-dozen cabinet ministers MPs from Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan, cutting across party lines, were present at the breakfast meeting.
The list included BJP MP from Sultanpur and former WCD minister Maneka Gandhi, BJP Rajya Sabha MP Bhupender Yadav and former tourism minister Mahesh Sharma.
Also read: Is COVID-19 a biological weapon and can neem or hot bath prevent it? Fact-checking 24 claims
Dushyant had also been going to Parliament since attending the party in Lucknow.
Posting a video on Twitter, Trinamool Congress MP Derek O’Brien said he was practising self-quarantine as he met the Rajasthan MP in Parliament.
“Am on self-isolation and following all protocol, as I was sitting right next to MP Dushyant for two hours at a #Parliament meeting on March 18.”
5.30 pm.
Friday, March 20.
Home.
New Delhi.
My statement on video.
Am on self-isolation and following all protocol, as I was sitting right next to MP Dushyant for two hours at a #Parliament meeting on March 18. #COVID19 pic.twitter.com/vX01w9o1D8
— Citizen Derek | নাগরিক ডেরেক (@derekobrienmp) March 20, 2020
Until Friday evening, a majority of the MPs did not have a clue that Dushyant Singh had attended Kapoor’s party before coming for the breakfast meeting and that he has now gone into self-quarantine.
“I don’t know. I will check with my family physician immediately,” a BJP MP, who had attended the breakfast meeting, told ThePrint.
Apna Dal MP Anupriya Patel too said she was going into self-quarantine as she attended an event with Dushyant Thursday.
कल एक कार्यक्रम में मैं मौजूद थी। उस कार्यक्रम में सहयोगी सांसद श्री दुष्यंत सिंह भी मौजूद थे। सावधानी के तौर पर मैं सेल्फ़ आइसोलेसन में जा रही हूँ। सरकार द्वारा आवश्यक दिशा निर्देशो का पालन करूँगी ।
— Anupriya Patel (@AnupriyaSPatel) March 20, 2020

This report has been updated to remove Congress MP Sushmita Dev’s name as she was not present at the breakfast meeting with the President. The error is regretted.
Also read: How countries worst hit by coronavirus are effecting lockdowns to deal with the pandemic
 
