CBSE announces exam dates for Class 10 and 12 boards, masks and santisers a must
New Delhi: The Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) Monday released the date sheet for the pending Class 10 and 12 board exams.
While Class 10 exams are being conducted only in Northeast Delhi, where some exams had to be postponed due the riots in February, Class 12 exams will be conducted throughout the country.
According to the sheet, Class 12 exams will start from 1 July and go on until 13 July, and Class 10 exams for the Northeast Delhi region will be conducted between 3 July and 5 July.
The CBSE’s official website lists the subject-wise date sheet, which has also been made available to all schools. Timing for the exams have been set between 10.30 am and 1.30 pm.
The Union Human Resource Development Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank made the announcement Monday afternoon in a series of tweets.
प्रिय विद्याथिर्यों, आप सभी से #CBSE की 10वीं की बची हुई परीक्षाओं की डेट शीट साझा कर रहा हूँ। ये परीक्षाएं केवल उत्तर पूर्वी दिल्ली के विद्यार्थियों के लिए होंगी।मैं आप सभी को आगामी परीक्षाओं के लिए हार्दिक शुभकामनाएं देता हूँ।All the best 👍#StaySafe #StudyWell pic.twitter.com/iEtJ9vgWXX
— Dr Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank (@DrRPNishank) May 18, 2020

Apart from the exam time-table, the notice also gives certain instructions for students to follow while taking the exams in view of the coronavirus pandemic. This includes wearing a mask, covering one’s nose and mouth at all times, maintaining social distance from other students and carrying a hand sanitiser in a transparent bottle.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Apart from this, the board has also urged parents to educate their children about the precautions required to avoid Covid-19. The exam admit card will also contain these instructions.
As reported by ThePrint, the instruction are in line with the CBSE’s strategy to complete conducting the exams during the pandemic.
The board will also ensure that only 12 students are seated in a room meant for 24 so that basic physical distancing is maintained. There, however, will be no thermal screening or temperature screening at the exam halls. Instead, the board has asked parents to inform the school in advance if their child is ill.
