Modi calls Kashmiri student, Pune nurse to boost morale during Covid-19 lockdown
New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi is personally reaching out to a wide range of people to boost morale in the midst of the 21-day nationwide lockdown.
On Friday, he made personal phone calls to Kashmiri medical student Nizamur Rehman who recently returned from China and also to Chhaya Jagtap, a nurse from Pune who has been treating Covid-19 patients.
Rehman, along with 60 other Kashmiri students, was evacuated from Wuhan in China in February, where the coronavirus outbreak first began.
During his phone call with Rehman, Prime Minister Modi enquired about his well-being and then asked how he felt when the news of the virus first emerged in Wuhan. 
“Initially we were very tense but then thanks to the Indian government we were evacuated safely,” Rehman said, thanking the PM.
Modi also asked him about his “experience” and the processes he had to undergo after landing here.
“We were treated very nicely. We got all kinds of medical facilities, food and we were also able to play indoor games (while in quarantine)… We were a group of 60 students from Kashmir and all are safely back in their home now,” Rehman informed.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: Why Modi, Trump & others are angry at WHO’s handling of Covid-19 crisis 
The prime minister also expressed concerns about the coronavirus-positive cases that have been reported from the Kashmir valley and asked Rehman to instruct people on what precautions they should take since he was a doctor.
“It is of concern that cases of coronavirus are being reported in Kashmir. You are a doctor, you should tell people what precautions they should take. You should also guide the youth there and make people understand that quarantine is not imprisonment,”  the PM said.
Modi also spoke to Pune-based nurse Chhaya Jagtap on the phone.
Lauding her efforts in Marathi, he asked her if she worries about herself and her family.
“Yes I do get concerned about myself and my family but work is work. We have to serve the people,” she said, adding that when Covid-19 patients come to the hospital, many of them are scared and worried.
Modi also asked if patients’ families create any issues with the doctors and nurses that disrupts their work.
“We do not let any of the family members come in. Patients get treated in isolation. We only look after them. Nobody is allowed to meet these patients who remain quarantined,” she responded.
Also read: These are the schemes that will be covered under Modi govt’s Rs 1.7 lakh crore package
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
