Modi wants COVID-19 video chat with G20 leaders, but his SAARC plans are yet to take off
New Delhi: India has now proposed to hold a video conference with G20 leaders to explore measures to tackle the coronavirus outbreak. But the proposals discussed during a similar exercise with SAARC leaders Sunday are yet to get off the ground.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has spoken to Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, Mohammed bin Salman, and his Australian counterpart Scott Morrison regarding his idea of holding a video conference with the G20 leaders.
During the video conference with the SAARC leaders Sunday, Modi had suggested the creation of a ‘SAARC COVID-19 Emergency Fund’ for which India pledged a contribution of $10 million.
But the emergency fund hasn’t been set up yet and, so far, there has been officially no commitment from any of the SAARC countries on how much they will be voluntarily contributing to the fund, sources told ThePrint.
The sources further said no deadline has been given to set up the fund, and the government is still working out the modalities on how the fund will be set up and whether an escrow account will be created for this. 
The government, meanwhile, is following up with other countries on their voluntary contribution.
The sources also said no timelines have been given on the implementation of other proposals.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“We will initiate anyway and expect others to follow,” said a senior government official, who didn’t want to be named.
A diplomat from one of the SAARC countries, however, said there has been no follow-up from India.
“We have not yet heard anything from India. There has been no follow-up. Right now, governments are all busy attending to their nationals stuck abroad. This will take time,” the diplomat said.

Also read: From Kashmir to coronavirus, how Modi’s silver bullet Jaishankar is keeping troubles away
Some of the other proposals such as setting up of rapid response teams, comprising doctors and specialists, and arranging for testing equipment are also moving at a slow, bureaucratic pace, the sources said.
Another proposal of setting up a website with key information on COVID-19 in all SAARC languages is yet to take shape.
According to experts, the proposals should have been implemented quickly, considering the situation.
“The prime minister had clearly stated that there is a ready team of doctors. At least the online training modules and the website could have been created. All these should work on a quick turnaround basis. But all countries and their ministers are busy among themselves because the crisis is such. Having said that, this should have been all the more of a reason why things should have happened quickly,” said Sharat Sabharwal, former Indian high commissioner to Pakistan.
Former ambassador Rajiv Bhatia, now a distinguished fellow at Gateway House, said, “The implementation part of it should be either given to the SAARC secretariat or the individual foreign ministries should handle it.”
“While the dangers of the virus spreading are high, these things take time to fructify at a regional level. Our neighbours are aware that India is willing to act and Delhi should start acting on it,” he added.
India has so far reported three deaths, while Pakistan and Bangladesh have seen one death each.
The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Pakistan sharply rose to 212 Tuesday, amid conflicting statements by authorities on the nation’s first casualty due to the viral infection.
Other SAARC countries such as Bhutan, Bangladesh, Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, Nepal and Maldives have imposed travel restrictions.
Modi pitched the video-conference idea to the Saudi Crown Prince during a telephonic conversation Tuesday. Saudi Arabia is scheduled to hold this year’s G20 Summit.
Modi also spoke to Australian PM Morrison last week, who thinks it is a “commendable initiative”.
The G20 members are Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States, and the European Union.
The video conference with the SAARC leaders, which took place on Modi’s initiative, was hailed by countries such as the US and Russia. They lauded India’s effort in taking the lead in such an unprecedented situation.
Also read: BJP will not hold protests for 1 month in view of coronavirus, says party chief JP Nadda
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
