In a bid for safe travel, IndiGo to allow double seat bookings from 24 July
New Delhi: To ensure safe travel amid the coronavirus pandemic, Indian airlines IndiGo has launched 6E double seat bookings that allows passengers to book two seats for a single passenger.
In 6E double seat bookings, only one boarding pass is generated for the two seats.
Passengers will be able to opt for the 6E double seat booking only at the time of booking on the airline’s website. This can be availed by both passengers as well as travel agents and the charges for the extra seat will be up to 25 per cent of the original booking cost.
However, this facility will not be available through travel portals and the airline’s call centre. Customers also cannot avail the 6E double seat booking once the original seat is booked.
Airport charges like PSF, UDF will not be charged on this scheme, IndiGo said in a statement. This booking will only be an airline component, GST will be charged and therefore, will be at a lower price rate than the total fare paid for the original booking.
The offer will be effective from 24 July.
“Even though air travel is the safest mode of travel at this point, we understand the customers’ emotional need for safety. We had been receiving such requests and are happy to introduce the option to book two seats for a single passenger to ensure additional safety. The 6E double seat will provide a stress-free flying experience to our customers,” said IndiGo’s Chief Strategy & Revenue Officer, Mr Sanjay Kumar, in a statement.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: Indian airlines face risk of extinction as Modi govt refuses to rescue them
Seat selection charges under the 6E double seat booking scheme will apply to both the seats and will require mandatory selection at the time of booking the tickets. On the extra seat, regular changes and cancellation charges will be based on the type of fare purchased.
However, this extra seat booking doesn’t entitle the passenger for additional baggage allowance.
The seat can also be used for those travelling with large musical instruments, a child’s car seat and for passengers with special seating needs owing to size, comfort or disability, the company said in its statement.
“We are constantly working towards measures and services to strengthen air travel as the safest choice for travellers. We are confident that this option will enhance the passenger comfort and trust, augmenting the overall demand for air travel,” said Kumar.
