‘100 Hindus’, said to be in Chhattisgarh Tablighi isolation list, complain of social boycott
Raipur: The Chhattisgarh government last week quarantined 159 people allegedly linked to Delhi’s Tablighi Jamaat congregation — but most of these individuals are Hindus, ThePrint has learnt.
At least two government officials, who didn’t want to be named, told ThePrint that of the 159, over 100 are Hindus.
The names of these 159 people, who were said to be in Delhi’s Nizamuddin area when the Tablighi Jamaat congregation was held mid-March, were mentioned in a list issued by the state home department last month. ThePrint has accessed the list.
But, Raipur Collector S. Bharti Dasan and the state’s Principal Secretary, Home, Subrata Sahu, said no such list was issued.
However, a senior state home department official, who didn’t want to be named, told ThePrint: “Listing of the names was done on the basis of location of mobile phones traced in Nizamuddin in the month of March during the period when congregation of Tablighi Jamaat was held.
“It was subsequently sent to the chief medical officers in the respective districts for further action,” the official added.
These 159 people have either been quarantined at their homes or at government isolation centres. The quarantine exercise took place between 31 March and 1 April.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
ThePrint contacted some of these people and all of them denied attending the massive Jamaat congregation, which had seen the participation of over 3,000 people, including foreigners.
Under quarantine “forcefully”, these people alleged they are facing social boycott as they have been “linked to the Tablighi”.
Also read: Call it a mistake, not conspiracy against India, say Muslim scholars on Tablighi Jamaat event
Those placed under quarantine, told ThePrint if their phone locations have shown their presence in the Nizamuddin area that didn’t necessarily mean they had attended the Tablighi congregation.
“My neighbours are no longer like my family. After 31 March, I have received more than 500 calls (from relatives and friends) and had to convince them that I didn’t attend the Jamaat event,” Umesh Pandey, a resident of Ambikapur, told ThePrint.
“People in my area have started saying that some Brahmins took part in the event. I have no objection to being kept in quarantine, but it should be explained why it is being done,” said Pandey, who is a consumer rights activist.
Pandey said, like every year, he had gone to Delhi in March to participate in a consumer protection programme and had stayed at a hotel in Nizamuddin. 
“I came back on 17 March. After I was quarantined, a false propaganda is being spread about me that I am linked with Tablighi Jamaat activities.”
Pandey said he and his family are now being “looked at as suspects”. 
Kamal Kumar Popatani, a businessman from Bilaspur district, has faced similar problems. Popatani and his family have been living in isolation since 31 March.
“I am completely flabbergasted by this step taken by the state government. I always visit Delhi to procure items for my shop. This time too I had completed my procurement and had returned home on 16 March. Everything was usual till 30 March, but suddenly after 31 March, when this so-called list of 159 alleged suspects was released by the government, we were placed under isolation,” Popatani said.
“My own family members, neighbours and everyone I know are now accusing me that I had joined the Tabligi Jamaat gathering. How can it ever happen? This strange attitude of the government has made my entire family a victim of social boycott.”
Trader Abdul Rahman, a resident of Lutra Sharif area of Bilaspur district, also echoed similar sentiments.
“I returned from Delhi along with my wife on 15 March, but my entire family has been kept in isolation since 31 March. All this is way beyond my comprehension… Blood samples of the entire family were taken. Now everyone is keeping a distance from us and calling us corona suspects,” said Rahman, who had gone to Delhi for a holiday.
“People not only from my village but also in the nearby villages are pointing fingers at me and my family… We are the ones who condemn Tablighi Jamaat and their activities. We have nothing to do with them. The quarantine… has brought…infamy to us,” he added.
The list even includes names of some people who no longer live in the state but carried mobile numbers issued in Chhattisgarh.
One such name is that of BSF sub-inspector Shantanu Mukherjee, who was working in Bhilai about two years ago, but is currently posted in Delhi.
“What kind of list is this? Who released it in the first place? At first, I received a call from the Covid-19 control room in Chhattisgarh and then from the State Police Control Centre. They inquired about my health and current place of posting,” said Mukherjee, whose office is located close to the Nizamuddin area. 
Makkhan Singh Yadav, a sub-inspector with the CRPF, is another case in point.
Yadav, who is posted somewhere close to Nizamuddin, had bought a SIM card from Dantewada, when he was posted there five years ago.
“I had received calls from both Delhi and Chhattisgarh police after being marked as a corona suspect. But when I explained the reality to them, no calls were made thereafter. I could not understand how all this is taking place,” said Yadav, who is a native of Rampur, Uttar Pradesh.
A first-year Delhi University student, who belongs to Mahasamund district of Chhattisgarh, has been kept under isolation at a local government hospital.
The student, who didn’t want to be named, said she had gone to Nizamuddin railway station to catch a train for Chhattisgarh.
“I came home immediately after it was announced that educational institutions are shutting down. After returning from Delhi, I spent around 19 days at my own home, but suddenly I was admitted to the hospital on 1 April. Why have I been brought here (hospital) if I have no symptoms? All this feels like some sort of torture.”
“Despite my repeated denial, I was brought here by the health department on the pretext of being associated with the Tablighi Jamaat,” she said. 
Also read: Tamil Nadu is worst-hit by Tablighi Jamaat event, but also seeing men admit participation
Asked about the Tablighi quarantine list, principal secretary Sahu said: “The government has issued no such list. We have received inputs from the social media about three such lists but the state government has not officially prepared any list.
“All those put under quarantine have been done as per the orders issued by the state government. This order states that those who came to the state after 1 March should be kept under isolation,” he added.
Raipur Collector Dasan refused to say anything about the list and added that people have been kept under quarantine after obtaining their “detailed travel history” based on the guidelines issued by the ICMR.
On the allegation of social boycott, Dasan said: “No person or their families placed under home quarantine or isolation should be subjected to any social boycott or misconduct. They also need not have any social inferiority complex in their minds.
“If any person placed under quarantine feels like this (social inferiority complex), the government has arranged counsellors for them. Our counsellors are convincing and assuring such people by reaching out to them.”       
On Thursday, Chhattisgarh reported seven positive cases, taking the total number of cases to 9. All the seven cases have been reported from Kathghora suburb of Korba district. 
Chief Minister Bhupesh Baghel has ordered sealing of the entire suburb.
As of 8 April, the state government had collected samples from 2,979 identified suspects. Of these 2,795 samples tested negative and reports for 174 are awaited. So far, nine patients have been discharged. 
Also read: Tablighi Jamaat will have to change its ways in post-Covid world order
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Instead of playing a positive role, you people in the media are really causing havoc in these trying times. You are not even aware of the bachcha of journalism.
Your headline itself is wrong and unnecessarily provocative – when there is no tableeghi list in cg, why are you guys insisting on propogating this obnoxius idea and causing terrible harm.
Headline should have been – travelers returning from Delhi to chhattisgarh wrongly harassed.
Please find out how this idea of tableegh list came out – trace and catch the culprit.
And stop being sensational and subtitling as goof up – when there was none , putting wrong provocative headlines and the like. Tracing at risk people through a mobile tower, is actually a very unique idea which other states should do too. But your kind of public stupidity makes people communal and biased
Media
To,
The Honourable Chief Justice
of All Free Online E-Supreme Courts of the world
Sub: Request for passing orders to all the Governments to make public full details on how did 356,656 as on 10-4-2020 recover from COVID-19. Such details will help all  7,776,737,220 surviving world population to live in peace relieved from the the ongoing curfew imposed by the Governments.
With Kind Regards and for favourable orders
Yours Sincerly
Jagatheesan Chandrasekharan
Such an appeal may be sent by all surviving people to the Free Online E-Supreme Courts.
Lock your homes and place a
NO ENTRY
boardfor COVID-19, Yama dharmaraja, Murderer of democratic institutions(Modi), Bevakoof Jhoothe Psychopaths (BJP) and the chief of RSS(Rowdy/Rakshasa Swayam Sevaks) Facist Hitlers to prevent starvation deaths
May all 7.86 Billion surviving world population  be ever happy, well and secure!
 May all live long!
 May all be calm, quiet, alert, attentive, and have equanimity mind with a clear understanding that everything is changing !
How did 330,589 COVID-19 cases recovered:
The world will be happy if the secret as to how and with what vaccineor medicine have they been cured which has to be published.This willsave treatment cost of Rs 7.5 Lakhs in Government and Rs.15 lakhs inPrivate Hospitals. All Supreme Courts must pass orders on this account to put an end to COVID-19.Social Media must highlight this aspect.
