Javed Jaaferi pokes fun at Amit Shah’s ‘coronalogy’ & Trump’s corona worry about ‘Mini Mike’
New Delhi: Some unusual suspects came out to express their thoughts on Twitter on everything from the 2020 Super Tuesday polls in the US, to the latest instances of hate speech.
Democrat Joe Biden might have emerged as the big winner in the Super Tuesday results, but US President Donald Trump prefers focusing on the biggest loser.
Elizabeth “Pocahontas” Warren, other than Mini Mike, was the loser of the night. She didn’t even come close to winning her home state of Massachusetts. Well, now she can just sit back with her husband and have a nice cold beer!
— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 4, 2020

He also made fun of the man he calls ‘Mini Mike’ using the dreaded coronavirus epidemic as a way to teach him a lesson.
Elizabeth “Pocahontas” Warren, other than Mini Mike, was the loser of the night. She didn’t even come close to winning her home state of Massachusetts. Well, now she can just sit back with her husband and have a nice cold beer!
— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 4, 2020

American political scientist Yoshihiro Francis Fukuyama can neither contain his disappointment nor hide his sarcasm about the results.
Democrats really want to beat @realDonaldTrump.
— Francis Fukuyama (@FukuyamaFrancis) March 4, 2020

We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Any clue what Congress leader Randeep Singh Surjewala is talking about? No? Never mind…
मोदी जी,
1 US$ = ₹73.08
विपक्ष मे रहते हुए $ के बदले ₹ की गिरती कीमत पर आपने जाने कितने ट्वीट किये, कितने कटाक्ष किए।
आज 15 महीने में ₹ की कीमत सबसे निचले स्तर पर है और आप ट्विटर-ट्विटर खेल रहे हैं।
आपके जुमले अनुसार 1$ के मुकाबले ₹45 कीमत कब होगी?
देश जानना चाहता है! pic.twitter.com/J4oSeEVZs1
— Randeep Singh Surjewala (@rssurjewala) March 3, 2020

The BJP is hell-bent on trying to label other parties with the hate speech label. Here, Amit Malviya gets an `A’ for his efforts.
Hate speech given by– Sonia Gandhi (no channel showed her hate filled video)– Rahul Gandhi– Priyanka Vadra– Harsh Mander– Asaduddin Owaisi– Waris Pathan– Ammanatullah Khan– Shoaib Iqbal– Umar Khalid– assorted mullahs, AAP & Congress leadersresponsible for Delhi riots..
— Amit Malviya (@amitmalviya) March 4, 2020

Shiv Sena MP Sanjay Raut is in a rather cryptic mood today…
कुछ रिश्ते दरवाज़े खोलजाते हैया तो दिल के, या तोआँखों के…….
— Sanjay Raut (@rautsanjay61) March 4, 2020

 
Delhi Police or more precisely DCP South East Delhi issues a ‘sweet warning’ in Big Brother fashion.
Hey guys!
Not done. You have taken the job of spreading नफ़रत so brazenly.
Rest assured, we are watching you all, and mighty well. While we know some of these are fake IDs, be sure of our capabilities to hunt you down 😎.
Take this as a sweet warning!#DelhiPoliceNailsFake
— DCP South East Delhi (@DCPSEastDelhi) March 3, 2020

And here are four points by author Manu Joseph on why the Citizenship Amendment Act is a big fat mess.
The amended citizenship act is a dumb piece of legislation considering 1) its language 2) how little it achieves 3) its disproportionate damage, like loss in India's prestige 4) the BJP's global image as evil when it didn't set out to be evil in this regard.
— Manu Joseph (@manujosephsan) March 4, 2020

BJP national spokesperson Meenakshi Lekhi talks facts—what a pleasant change.
Has UNHRC heard of Lautenberg amendment for persecuted groups which grants refugee status in the United States for Jews, Evangelical Christians,Catholics,Orthodox or Baha’is. UNHRC should disclose how many Hindus have been given refugees status from Pak, Afg or Bangladesh? https://t.co/rfRYW06f1e
— Meenakashi Lekhi (@M_Lekhi) March 3, 2020

NDTV’s Prannoy Roy lauds India’s Election Commission of India after watching the way the US makes a hash of voting.
After hearing of the terrible voting procedures in the US primaries especially in Texas-with voters standing in queues for 5 hours to cast their vote-I salute our Election Commision and our entire voting system. Especially since we have 100s of millions more voters than the USA
— Prannoy Roy (@PrannoyRoyNDTV) March 4, 2020

Bollywood actor Jaaved Jaaferi just took a savage dig at Home Minister Amit Shah.
Home Minister's advice on how to tackle the virus: Aap Coronalogy samajhiye
— Jaaved Jaaferi (@jaavedjaaferi) March 4, 2020

 
Ex-Big Boss contestant and son of former BJP union minister Pramod Mahajan, Rahul compares the infamous Hyderabad encounter case with the 16 December convicts.
निर्भया के दोषियों की फाँसी फिर टली, जब अदालत को पता है कि फांसी की सज़ा होने के बावजूद दया याचिका आदि को चुनौती देने का अधिकार है मुजरिम को, तो बार बार डेथ वारंट जारी कर निर्भय के परिवार का मज़ाक़ क्यूँ बनाया जाता है? शायद इसीलिए लोग ‘हैदराबाद वाला इंसाफ़’ पसंद करते हैं।
— Rahul Mahajan (@TheRahulMahajan) March 3, 2020
