Senior Punjab cop loses battle with Covid-19, was to undergo plasma therapy
Chandigarh: A senior Punjab Police officer, who had tested positive for the novel coronavirus, died at a hospital Saturday after suffering from comorbid conditions.
Anil Kohli, an assistant commissioner of police (ACP) in Ludhiana, was on ventilator support for the past several days at the SPS Apollo Hospital in Ludhiana. The 52-year-old officer was scheduled for a plasma therapy but died before the procedure could begin.
The Punjab government had Friday decided to support the medical team of the SPS Apollo Hospital to conduct plasma therapy on Kohli.
Mohali Deputy Commissioner Girish Dayalan told ThePrint that a coronavirus survivor from Mohali was sent to Ludhiana Saturday morning as the plasma donor.
“There he was tested for the requisite antibodies required in the plasma for which he tested positive. But before the process of plasma therapy could begin, the ACP’s condition had considerably deteriorated and unfortunately nothing could be done,” said Dayalan.
Condoling the death, Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh tweeted saying the state has lost two “corona warriors” — ACP Kohli and revenue official Gurmel Singh (who died Friday after testing positive for the virus).
“Sad to share that we had lost Gurmel Singh Kanungo yesterday and ACP Anil Kohli in Ludhiana to # Covid-19 today. In this moment of crisis, losing our Corona Warriors is a big loss for the state. I join their families in this time of grief. Rest assured Punjab will stand by them,” Singh said.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Sad to share that we had lost Gurmail Singh Kanungo yesterday & ACP Anil Kohli in Ludhiana to #Covid19 today. In this moment of crisis, losing our Corona Warriors is a big loss for the State. I join their families in this time of grief. Rest assured Punjab will stand by them.
— Capt.Amarinder Singh (@capt_amarinder) April 18, 2020

The chief minister also announced Rs 50 lakh ex-gratia to the next of kin of both officers. He said a similar amount will be paid to family members of any official who dies in the line of duty due to coronavirus.
“Deeply saddened to lose two of my officials to #Covid19. Have decided to pay Rs 50 lakh ex-gratia to their next to kin. While I pray such an incident shouldn’t happen, but if it does, state govt will pay Rs 50 lakh to NoK of officials who die in line of duty due to #Covid19 (sic),” he said.
Deeply saddened to lose two of my officials to #Covid19. Have decided to pay Rs. 50 lakhs ex-gratia to their next to kin. While I pray such an incident shouldn't happen, but if it does, State Govt will pay Rs. 50 lakhs to NoK of officials who die in line of duty due to #Covid19.
— Capt.Amarinder Singh (@capt_amarinder) April 18, 2020

Also read: Rotis, mobile recharges, carrom boards — how Kerala fixed its migrant worker anger
ACP Kohli had joined the Punjab Police in 1990, at a time when the state saw large instance of terrorism.
Family sources said Kohli was cremated by his son Paras Kohli with full state honour at the Gas Crematorium in Ludhiana. His cremation was attended by Ludhiana Police Commissioner Rakesh Agarwal, MP Ravneet Singh Bittu and other elected representatives.
Punjab has so far reported 218 positive cases and 16 deaths. The state continues to be among the top in the country in terms of Covid-19 fatalities, raising eyebrows about  treatment protocols being followed and hospital care for coronavirus patients.
