Delhi Police will now track quarantined patients through mobile location, says Kejriwal
New Delhi: The Delhi Police will now track mobile phone locations of those who have been quarantined at home to prevent violations of orders.
The decision has been taken after senior Delhi government officials received feedback about quarantined individuals stepping out, and CM Arvind Kejriwal said Wednesday that the police have begun tracking their phones.
“If it is noticed that their phone has moved to multiple locations, we will know the person was violating the rules,” said Kejriwal, adding that this would also help the government monitor the people such individuals came in contact with.
The exercise was tested Tuesday, when Kejriwal and Delhi’s Lieutenant Governor Anil Baijal received data for 11,084 people. A total of 14,345 individuals are being tracked Wednesday.
“Strict action will be taken against those who do not adhere to the order,” said Kejriwal while addressing a digital press conference.
Also read: 3,763 people detained, 200 cases registered for violation of lockdown in Delhi
Kejriwal also addressed the restlessness of people who had not received their salaries on the first day of April, and stated that his government would now allow two persons per organisation or firm in Delhi to be given passes, so that they can go to their respective offices/banks to release the salaries of employees in their online accounts.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“Since the accountant himself/herself hasn’t been able to step out, I received various calls in this regard, and this is why we have decided to allow two persons per organisation to be granted permission to do this,” he said.
Kejriwal reiterated that those who do not have a ration card in Delhi should start applying online on the Delhi government’s e-district website.
“This does not mean you will get a ration card,” he clarified. “But this will help us understand you don’t have one, and as promised, we will provide free ration to even those who don’t have cards.”
The Delhi government plans to provide 7.5 kg free rations to people who apply for the cards.
He also said that over 35,000 construction workers have already received Rs 5,000 each from the Delhi government in their bank accounts, and that the government is working on transferring the sum to around 9,000 more accounts.
Kejriwal said that so far, there was no community transmission of Covid-19 in Delhi, and the situation was under control. “Out of 120 corona-infected people, 49 are flyers, 24 are from Nizamuddin Markaz, and 29 are close contacts of flyers,” he said.
Earlier in the day, the CM also announced that Rs 1 crore will be given to the kin of healthcare personnel if they lose their lives while dealing with coronavirus cases in the national capital. He tweeted out confirmation in the evening that the proposal had been approved at an emergency cabinet meeting.
Cabinet approves this proposal in an emergency Cabinet meeting https://t.co/XRVEOY9Okh
— Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) April 1, 2020
Also read: More than 2,100 foreigners linked to Tablighi Jamaat entered India since 1 January
