6 suspected coronavirus cases detected in Agra, govt confirms contact with Delhi patient
New Delhi: A day after two fresh cases of coronavirus emerged in Delhi and Hyderabad, six suspected cases have been detected in Agra, home of the Taj Mahal, the Union health ministry confirmed Tuesday.
“Six cases with high viral load have been detected during sample testing in Agra. These are the ones who have come in contact with the COVID-19 patient from New Delhi,” the ministry said in a press release.
The six people are being kept under isolation and their samples have been sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, for confirmation, the statement further added.
Also read: Coronavirus in India: A list of dos and don’ts to follow to check spread of COVID-19
A revised travel advisory was also issued, suspending visas granted to nationals of Italy, Iran, South Korea and Japan.
“All regular (sticker) Visas/e-Visa (including VoA for Japan and South Korea) granted to nationals of Italy, Iran, South Korea, Japan and issued on or before 03.03.2020 and who have not yet entered India, stand suspended with immediate effect,” a second government release stated.
Visas granted to all foreign nationals who travelled to China, Iran, Italy, South Korea and Japan on or before 1 February also stand suspended, the advisory adds.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Meanwhile, Indians have been advised “to refrain from travel to China, Iran, Republic of Korea and Italy”. The health ministry said the decision was taken “in view of the emerging global scenarios regarding COVID-19”.
A 45-year-old man from Delhi and a 24-year-old man from Hyderabad became the fourth and fifth victims of the virus Monday. The ministry revealed that both cases were self-declared.
“They had contacted us and the IDSPs (Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme). In the second case, the patient had initially gone to a private hospital and he is now being kept in a government hospital,” Health Secretary Preeti Sudan said.
While the man from Delhi had recently travelled to Italy, the patient in Hyderabad had gone to Dubai.
Earlier, three persons, all students from China’s Wuhan, had tested positive for the virus in Kerala. They were discharged after being treated.
Also read: Why coronavirus is not just a risk to 2020 Tokyo Olympics but beyond as well
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
