Harvard considers smaller classes, cancelling fall sports as it plans for reopening
New York: Harvard University is weighing an array of options — from disinfecting classrooms after each session to reducing the number of students sitting in lecture halls — to cope with the coronavirus pandemic when it reopens, said President Lawrence Bacow.
The school will also likely cancel some fall sports, he said, and is holding off a decision to resume instruction on campus as long as possible.
“Lots of things will be different when students come back,” Bacow said Tuesday in an interview on Bloomberg Television with David Rubenstein. “The availability of classrooms will be a challenge.”
The Cambridge, Massachusetts, school hasn’t been immune to the economic impact of the coronavirus pandemic. Last month, Harvard forecast an almost $1.2 billion deficit over the fiscal year that ends June 30 and the one that begins July 1.
The decision about bringing students back to campus isn’t just about the kind of instruction they will receive. Among the issues is preparing the campus so that it can isolate students who may be hit with the virus.
Also read: These are the new ways IITs will assess students due to graduate this year
Here are other key takeaways from Bacow’s interview with Rubenstein, who is a member of the Harvard Corp., the university’s governing board.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The Ivy League school has declined to accept federal stimulus money available to it after a barrage of criticism, including from U.S. President Donald Trump. Harvard was eligible to receive about $8.7 million based on a federal formula. Several of its wealthy peers also announced they wouldn’t take the money, including Stanford, Princeton and Yale universities.
Harvard said in March that it is well positioned to withstand a recession and the interruption of its operations, largely because of long-term planning by endowment chief N.P. “Narv” Narvekar. The endowment lost 27% of its value in the last downturn. Its endowment was valued at $40.9 billion as of June 2019, the most recent publicly available figure.
The co-founder of private equity firm Carlyle Group Inc. hosts “Leadership Live With David Rubenstein” on BTV. – Bloomberg
