Raghav Chadha recalls Churchill on alcohol, Omar’s liquor wisdom, Chetan Bhagat’s `vaccine’ peg
New Delhi: After the sale of liquor was permitted from Monday, long queues outside stores, mostly without ‘social-distancing’, have been seen across the country. The high spirits infected Twitter too.
In other good news, three Kashmiri photographers who won the Pulitzer Prize.
After huge crowds jostled outside liquor stores in the capital, BJP national spokesperson Sambit Patra wants the Delhi government to ‘fix’ something.
अगर population density और Corona positive cases के अनुपात को देखें तो पाएँगे की दिल्ली आज भारत में सर्वाधिक संक्रमित राज्य हैTV पर अभी शराब की दुकानों के जो दृश्य दिख रहें है ..वो डराने वाली है।दिल्ली सरकार को व्यवस्था ठीक करने की आवश्यकता है वरना करोना युद्ध पर पानी फिर जाएगा।
— Sambit Patra (@sambitswaraj) May 5, 2020

National Conference leader Omar Abdullah sees the humour in a 70 per cent ‘special corona fee’ in Delhi.
One man’s misery is another man’s fortune 😀 https://t.co/8hKDW5grit
— Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) May 4, 2020

AAP MLA Raghav Chadha defends the government’s decision to allow liquor shops to open with Winston Churchill’s words of wisdom. The former British prime minister was known to enjoy his liquor.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
I have taken more out of alcohol than alcohol has taken out of me.– Winston Churchill
— Raghav Chadha (@raghav_chadha) May 4, 2020

Filmmaker Vivek Agnihotri is caught changing his mind about opening liquor outlets.
HKBSHH pic.twitter.com/Wl2yTQR3R4
— Pratik Sinha (@free_thinker) May 5, 2020

TMC leader Dinesh Trivedie has no such dilemma.
If argument for opening up of liquor shops is only economic compulsion then why lock down. Open up the whole thing .So far we have done well considering our population, poverty etc. Is it worth taking a chance ?
— Dinesh Trivedi (@DinTri) May 5, 2020

Author Chetan Bhagat speaks for many in his reaction to the liquor “vaccine’’.
People are flocking to liquor shops like they are selling the Corona vaccine.
— Chetan Bhagat (@chetan_bhagat) May 4, 2020

And, after you read this, you will understand why state governments allowed liquor sales.
INDIA: On first day of reopening, Karnataka liquor shops have sold 390,000 liters beer and 850,000 liters Indian made liquor.
Totaling $5.9 million (Rs 45 crore) in sales.
— Norbert Elekes (@NorbertElekes) May 4, 2020

Onto to the Pulitzer Prize. Journalist Pritish Nandy applauds three Indian photographers for capturing life in Kashmir, post revocation of Article 370 in the Valley.
Great news for Indian journalism at last! The Pulitzer Prize, journalism’s most prestigious award, has been won in 2020 by 3 Indian API photographers Dar Yasin, Mukhtar Khan and Channi Anand  for their “striking images of life” in Kashmir after the Centre abrogated Article 370.
— Pritish Nandy (@PritishNandy) May 5, 2020

Journalist Anoo Bhuyan notes the humility of one of the winners, Dar Yasin.
Dar Yasin just won a Pulitzer and he just plainly copy-pasted the link, contrast with the rest of us who beat our drums forever and ever 😬 https://t.co/pP118HiaKd
— Anoo Bhuyan (@AnooBhu) May 5, 2020

Political strategist Prashant Kishor demands proof of Health Minister Harsh Vardhan’s claim that India is doing community based random testing everywhere.
In a TV interview health minister @drharshvardhan claimed that India is REGULARLY doing “Community Based Random Testing” for #COVID19 in ALL districts with atleast 250 persons tested per district!
Good news but where are the results? It is certainly not in the public domain! 🧐
— Prashant Kishor (@PrashantKishor) May 5, 2020

Retd IAS officer and social activist Harsh Mander blames the states for the misery of migrant workers.
Unless railways run thousands of trains daily, it won't be possible for millions of stranded migrants to return. This unending humanitarian crisis could have been averted only by state payment of wages during lockdown. Instead they were profoundly failed & abandoned by the state
— Harsh Mander (@harsh_mander) May 5, 2020

Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh salutes three CRPF soldiers killed in a militant ambush..
Anguished to hear that three brave soldiers of CRPF were martyred in a militant attack in Handwara. It pains to lose our brave soldiers. I am sure our Forces will give a befitting reply to these terrorists. I salute you all!
— Capt.Amarinder Singh (@capt_amarinder) May 4, 2020

Mumbai Police says ‘Boys will be Boys’ not an excuse…
Boys will be boys – never an acceptable excuse earlier, will never be one ever after #StopThemYoung pic.twitter.com/sJx7nFOy4P
— Mumbai Police (@MumbaiPolice) May 4, 2020

Find out why Donald Trump thinks the US is “sooo lucky’’ to have him as president.
Mexico is sadly experiencing very big CoronaVirus problems, and now California, get this, doesn’t want people coming over the Southern Border. A Classic! They are sooo lucky that I am their President. Border is very tight and the Wall is rapidly being built!
— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 4, 2020

And on a happy parting note, SpaceX CEO and tech billionaire Elon Musk welcomes his first child with singer Grimes. We already have a name suggestion, Tesla Jr?
Mom & baby all good
— Elon Musk (@elonmusk) May 5, 2020
