India receives second batch of medical supplies for Covid-19 from China
New Delhi: India has received the second batch of critical medical supplies, including protective gears, masks and ventilators, from China in a span of two days even as the Narendra Modi government is exporting equipment to other countries amid the Covid-19 outbreak.
“The second batch of donation from Chinese charity organizations Jack Ma and Alibaba Foundations has arrived in Delhi today and been received by the Indian Red Cross Society. The donation includes protective clothes, masks, respirators and ventilators,” Sun Weidong, Ambassador of China to India, said in a tweet on Monday.
In a second tweet, the envoy said Chinese state-owned companies are also providing assistance to their Indian partners.
“The Chinese people will stand firmly with the Indian people on the fight against COVID19 and we’ll get through hard times together,” he added.
The second batch of donation from Chinese charity organizations Jack Ma and Alibaba Foundations has arrived in Delhi today and been received by the Indian Red Cross Society. The donation includes protective clothes, masks, respirators and ventilators. (1/2)
— Sun Weidong (@China_Amb_India) March 31, 2020

India had received the first batch of medical items from China on 28 March, which was also donated to the Indian Red Cross Society by the Jack Ma Foundation and Alibaba Foundation.
Ma, Chinese billionaire and co-founder of tech giant Alibaba, has actively sent medical supplies to countries around the world over the last month.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: RSS affiliate appeals to Modi govt to not import Covid-19 testing kits, masks from China
The Chinese supply comes at a time when India is facing a massive shortage of personal protective equipment, masks, gloves, goggles and ventilators — critical to fight the coronavirus pandemic. Doctors and nurses have been highlighting this, urging the government to ramp up production of these items on a war footing.
Even during his video conference Monday with the head of Indian missions abroad, Prime Minister Narendra Modi was apprised of the fact that efforts were being taken by diplomats posted in other countries to procure these items from there.
However, India is also exporting medical equipment to countries such as Serbia at this time.
“The 2nd cargo Boeing 747 with 90t of medical protective equipment landed from India to Belgrade today. The transportation of valuable supplies purchased by @SerbianGov has been fully funded by the #EU while @UNDPSerbia organized the flight & ensured the fastest possible delivery,” tweeted UNDP Serbia last week.
The 2nd cargo Boeing 747 with 90t of medical protective equipment landed from India to Belgrade today. The transportation of valuable supplies purchased by @SerbianGov has been fully funded by the #EU while @UNDPSerbia organized the flight & ensured the fastest possible delivery. pic.twitter.com/pMZqV7dwTg
— UNDP in Serbia (@UNDPSerbia) March 29, 2020

While the Ministry of External Affairs hasn’t issued any details on exactly which items were exported, sources said it was not in violation of any rules.
On 24 March, India had banned the export of all kinds of ventilators, including artificial respiratory apparatus or oxygen therapy apparatus, breathing appliances and devices and sanitisers. Following this, India also stopped the export of the anti-malaria drug hydroxychloroquine with immediate effect on 25 March.
Also read: Consult doctors via phone or video call, but first know these dos & don’ts of telemedicine
 
