Sidhu Moose Wala releases song on Punjab ‘super-spreader’, gives call for social distancing
Chandigarh: Punjab’s first Covid-19 patient Baldev Singh, who died of the coronavirus on 18 March and threatens to become the state’s ‘super-spreader’, has now inspired popular singer Sidhu Moose Wala to compose a song that reiterates the significance of social distancing in dealing with the outbreak.
The song ‘Gwacheya Gurbaksh’ (literally, the lost Gurbaksh) is based on the manner in which the 70-year-old Baldev, who had landed in Punjab from Germany via Italy on 7 March, went about spreading the coronavirus despite having being told to quarantine himself at home.
Moose Wala is considered the most popular singer from Punjab, and currently resides in Canada. He has penned the song himself, while it has been composed by Preet Hundal.
Moose Wala released the song on his YouTube channel Thursday night, and it already has 1.7 million views. It is dedicated to the Punjab Police.
Also read: Preacher who was Punjab’s 1st Covid-19 death could have been a ‘super-spreader’
Baldev Singh, a resident of Banga in Nawanshahr district, was a religious preacher with a history of diabetes and other illnesses, who met hundreds of people since his return from abroad and went on to attend Hola Mohalla, the crowded festival held every year at Anandpur Sahib. At least seven members of Baldev Singh’s family have also been declared Covid-19-positive.
The lyrics to the song state:
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“Main Gurbaksh gawacha, Italy to aaya haan…
(I am Gurbaksh, the lost, and I have returned from Italy)
Khatre de vich pata, mera dudhaan tote nu 
(I have put the one whom I bathed with milk in peril)
Sigi main jedi bimari, oh mere ho gayi pote nu
(The disease that I had, I passed it on to my grandson)
Hun saare pind te ghumda phirda maut da saaya haan
(I am now roaming around in my village like a deathly shadow)
Main gurbaksh gawacha, Italy to aaya haan
(I am Gurbaksh, the lost, and I have returned from Italy).”
Punjab health officials are faced with the Herculean task of tracing and locating every person Baldev Singh met in those 10 days, fearing that he might have already spread the coronavirus into the community in Punjab. Of the 38 Covid-19 patients in Punjab as of Friday evening, 27 are related to him and two associates who had accompanied him on the 16-day trip to Germany and Italy.
The song goes on to add:
“Galti meri bhugte duniya, na karyo aiwe vadde jere
(The world is now paying for my mistakes)
Soch soch main marda jawa, mere karke marde mere
(I die every minute thinking that because of me, my own are dying)
Kiddan khud nu maaf karu, bada zulm kamaya
(How will I forgive myself, I have earned such a big sin).”
Spoken words at the end of Moose Waala’s song go on to give a vital lesson in social distancing.
“Kyon ohda naam corona, Bharat de map utte
(Why should we put the coronavirus’ name on India’s map?)
Lok bhalai khatir, kaash main rehnda gap uttey 
(For the public good, I should have maintained a gap)
Kyun vipda vich panda main meriyan sarkara nu
(Why did I put my governments in so much trouble?)
Kaash main touch na karda mere jigri yaara nu
(I wish I had not touched my best friends)
Kaash main touch na karda apne rishtedara nu 
(I wish I had not touched my family members).”
The humanitarian effort in the wake of the coronavirus has brought together a large number of Punjabi film stars and singers. The Rabab Film Studio in Mohali has asked Punjabi and Bollywood celebrities to post one-minute messages on social media, highlighting the significance of social distancing.
“The message has received an enormous response. Celebrities like Beenu Chillon, Jasbir Jassi, Japjee Khaira, Ranjit Bawa, Gavie Chahal, Gippi Grewal, Harby Sangha, Sonia Mann, Diljot Kler, Gurpreet Ghuggi, Sarthi K, Tanya, Kulwinder Billa, Tarsem Jassar, Rana Ranbir, Mukesh Rishi, Kavita Kaushik, Sanvi Dhiman, Nisha Bano, Yashpal Sharma, Sunita Dheer and Mehtab Virk have already posted their videos, which are going viral on social media,” said Ashwani Sharma, owner of the studio.
Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh Friday tweeted a request message posted by singer Gurdas Mann on staying at home and contributing to the fight against Covid-19.
Earlier, he had shared a video of Punjabi film star Jaswinder Bhalla on understanding individual responsibilities in the times of a social crisis like this.
