UPSC aspirants call for merger of 2020 and 2021 exam, cite Covid disruption 
New Delhi: Thousands of aspirants are pushing an online petition that raises concerns over going ahead with the annual Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) exam on its scheduled 4 October date. They have cited the disruptions caused by the Covid-19 pandemic to suggest that this year’s exam be merged with the 2021 exercise. 
The posts on offer this year, they said, should accordingly be added to the ones notified for the 2021 exam.
If a postponement of the exam is not possible, the petitioners added, a compensatory attempt should be offered to aspirants who are left with just one shot to clear the exams. Started via Change.org, an online petitions portal, the demand had received 9,000 signatures by Saturday.
“We suggest to preferably merge the UPSC 2020 cycle along with 2021 cycle with the proportional increased posts and providing a compensatory attempt to those, whose last attempt ends by 2020,” the petition states. “Meanwhile, as estimated by various research agencies, the extremity of pandemic gets subsided and the vaccine is available for mass consumption.”
The preliminary examination — which is the first stage of the three-stage Civil Service Examination (CSE) — was initially scheduled for 31 May. However, due to the spread of the pandemic, the UPSC postponed it to 4 October. 
But the aspirants have pointed to the continued rise in Covid-19 cases to argue that it would be “unjust” to go ahead with the October date. 
As of Saturday, India had over 6.6 lakh active Covid-19 cases, with over 18 lakh recoveries and 49,036 deaths.
“The number of cases of Covid-19 is not plateauing. Even the vaccine is not available as of date. In these times of uncertainty where the pandemic is inching towards three million and started spreading beyond cities, we feel unsafe to take up any assignment that requires movement beyond our native place,” the petition adds. 
“Unlike other entrance examinations, the UPSC exam process is a three-stage performance capture structure. After giving prelims, the candidate has to get ready for Mains within 90 days,” the petition states. 
“Suppose if a candidate gets affected by Corona virus due to his prelims journey, he loses a fortnight of preparation time and it affects his chances of clearing Mains exam. On the top of this, he also loses the count of one attempt. This is sheer inequity.” 
Asked if there was a chance that the exam could be postponed again, a UPSC official told ThePrint that they are monitoring the situation on a daily basis, and a “call will be taken closer to the date”. 
Also Read: 50% IAS, IFS recruits are children of govt servants. But this is a story of their merit
Speaking to ThePrint, several civil services aspirants said they were grateful to the government for postponing the exam once, but sought another deferment in the interest of their health as well as to curtail the spread of the virus. 
“Over 6 lakh people take the exam every year… For people to travel in such large numbers across exam centres and venues along with their parents, prepare for the exam in such anxiety, and risk infection is extremely unfair,” said an aspirant who did not wish to be named. 
“Across the world, governments, universities are coming up with innovative ways to ensure that examinations can be conducted without imperiling the health of the youth… Our government should also take a liberal view in the matter,” the aspirant added. 
Also Read: Language test for UPSC — less than 5% IAS, IFS officers take civil services exam in Hindi
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
Why news media is in crisis & How you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And have just turned three.
At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous and questioning journalism. Please click on the link below. Your support will define ThePrint’s future.
Support Our Journalism 
Postpone exam this year
Yes this year upsc must be postpone the exam as covid is still spreading and there is no access to Internet newspaper and other things because of lockdown, flood and most important mental conditions of aspirants right now is not good. Coz of pandemic so plz merge 2020 and 2021 exam.
So plz request to all  directly mail to DOPT,UPSC as well as Home ministry regarding merging of this year exam with next year 2021 with both the years recruiting posts linking to the reasons r, Poor rural aspirants across the country don’t hv money to buy expensive online courses during this corona havoc as rural economy has completely been staggered, Corona peak yet to arrive by mid September,so infection fear as UPSC is a three tier exam,no proper study materials r sufficient available in all spheres of the country,like this…Plz write every body to the concerned departments as soon as possible…
Yes… We want this year prelims should be merged with 2021…even proper travelling facilities are not there and if it is then  that much fear and anxiety is there to travel in them…. How much precautions we will take then also even during exam going time mind will be in pressure whether infection will happen because of this or that thing……..even big big politicians and Bollywood personalities are getting despite having that much safety and precautions…. Then what about us common peoples…….plzzz zzzz merge it with 2021
It would be better if the CSE prelims gers cancelled on 4th Oct too because there is no vaccine and no any other way to appear for the exam on this day amid corona virus…government please help and support aspirants like us to give us another date that will work fairly in every way…. maybe Jan or feb or the merger ofcourse
Am not against conducting exam in this time. But my request is that govt should give a chance to those appearing for last time to withdraw their application and give us a compensatory attempt next year.
Regards
Ya I really appreciate with you all aspirants UPSC should merge this exam or give a compesnsatry extra chance to those who have last chance this year
Everyday we are reading how the pandemic has affected different groups emphasizing additional pressure on women with all the additional responsibilities of taking care of people at home. Are women not supposed to study and give exam. We are so badly burdened with chores of men staying at home and working from home while we are busy taking care of household needs and in between if we have a dream we are supposed to be finding out time and giving the exam still with SOPs. This is not fair for us women as well. We are affected too and considering this, this years exam must come with a proper resolution to be fair to all
Yes,as a UPSC civil service aspirant,this ll be the best plan & this year exam should be merged with next year exam as no proper study materials r being available in all spheres of the country & even there is severe health risk due to corona pandemic.
