Assam records highest single-day spike of 156 new Covid-19 cases, tally crosses 500-mark
Guwahati: Assam recorded its highest single-day spike of 156 cases on Monday, taking the total past the 500-mark, Health and Family Welfare Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma said.
With these fresh cases, the total number of COVID-19 infections has gone up to 548 in the state, of which 479 are active cases, Sarma said.
“Alert ~ Nine new cases of #COVID19+ reported. Swabs for testing taken before people sent for quarantine. All from Barpeta,” he tweeted.
In a series of tweets earlier during the day, the minister said samples of 147 people from across the districts tested positive for coronavirus, highest being in Golaghat with 59 COVID-19 cases.
Karimganj district recorded 21 positive cases, followed by 17 in Lakhimpur, 15 in Guwahati, six in Kokrajhar, five each in Cachar and Sivasagar, four each in Dhemaji and Hailakandi, three in South Salmara Mankachar, two each in Tinsukia and Nalbari, and one each in Nagaon, Jorhat, Morigaon and Goalpara, he added.
Five patients recovered from COVID-19 and were discharged from different hospitals in the state, the minister said.
“Five patients have been discharged today after testing negative for #COVID19 twice. Three from Guwahati and two from Jorhat medical college. Best wishes,” he tweeted.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Sarma said most of the latest cases are returnees from outside the state.
“It is clarified that all swabs are collected from people soon after they arrive from outstation. Subsequently they are transferred to the quarantine centres. Therefore most of the positive cases in Assam are imported and not home- grown!” he said in a tweet.
Of the total 548 cases, four patients have died due to the deadly disease, while 62 have been discharged from hospitals after recovery, Sarma said.
Besides, three more patients have migrated to other states, he said.
After inter-state movement through road and rail networks was allowed during the lockdown period, Assam saw a significant increase in COVID-19 cases.
With domestic flight operations resuming to Assam from Monday, the health officials are expecting this spike to be even more sharper in coming days.
To screen all the people coming from outside the state by road and rail networks, the government has set up five zonal screening camps besides those already existing at the district headquarters and local levels.
Kokrajhar has the zonal screening camp for Lower Assam districts, Tezpur for North Assam districts, Jorhat for Upper Assam districts, Guwahati for Central Assam districts and Silchar for Barak Valley districts.
A total of 70,029 samples have been tested for COVID-19 in seven laboratories in Assam and NIV in Pune, state the Health and Family Welfare Department said in its daily bulletin on Sunday night.
