Siddaramaiah moves to Mysuru as Covid cases among political leaders rise in Bengaluru
Bengaluru: After several leaders tested positive for Covid-19 in Bengaluru, senior Congress leader Siddaramaiah has decided to relocate to his farmhouse in Mysuru to avoid contracting the infection, ThePrint has learnt.
The 72-year-old former chief minister allegedly took the decision on the advice of his son and MLA from Varuna, Dr Yathindra. Siddaramaiah, who is diabetic, had also undergone a surgery recently for a cardiac ailment — putting him at high-risk of contracting the infection.
While he tested negative for the virus, the move is being undertaken to ensure least possible contact with anyone infected with the virus. He is expected to attend only important events in Bengaluru, according to his office.
Furthermore, Mysuru is considered a safe spot with only 479 positive cases of coronavirus recorded till date while Bengaluru has a total of 10,561 cases.
Also read: Karnataka villages lock themselves in amid Covid surge, impose Rs 5,000 fine for violations
An official working closely with the leader confirmed that the safety measure was taken after Congress MLA from Kunigal, H.D. Ranganath tested positive for the virus.
Ranganath had participated in the swearing-in ceremony of D.K. Shivakumar as the state party chief on 2 July. Siddaramaiah was also present at the event and several leaders underwent a Covid test after the MLA tested positive.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Mangaluru North BJP MLA Bharath Shetty, senior Congress leader Janardhan Poojary and Mandya MP Sumalatha Ambareesh have also tested positive for coronavirus.
Former Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee (KPCC) chief Dinesh Gundurao and his family have quarantined themselves after members of his staff were tested Covid-positive.
Tabu Rao, his wife, had tweeted the news Saturday stating that Rao’s personal assistant, gunman and two other staffers had tested positive for the virus.
“We have quarantined ourselves. Our tests have come negative, but I want to highlight how the staff and families of politicians who meet several people daily as part of their job should also be tested regularly,” Tabu told ThePrint.
