Ensure print, electronic media operate smoothly during lockdown: I&B ministry to states, UTs
New Delhi: The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has asked all states and union territories to allow the print and electronic media to function smoothly during the ongoing lockdown due to the coronavirus pandemic.   
In a letter sent to chief secretaries of all states and union territories Monday, Gopal Sadhwani, Director, Information and Broadcasting, has referred to news agencies, TV channels, teleport operators, Digital Satellite News Gathering (DSNGs), Direct to Home  and Highend-in-the-Sky (HITS) multi system operators (MSOs), cable operators, FM Radio and community radio as services that are of “utmost importance to ensure timely and authentic information dissemination”. 
To ensure the operational continuity of these services, Sadhwani noted that certain measures be taken in view of restrictions due to COVID-19 by state governments and union territory administrations.  
The letter said all operators of such facilities and intermediaries in the chain be permitted to remain operational, and movement of the accredited staff of service providers, as well as that of vehicles carrying mediapersons and DSNGs be permitted.  

He also urged the state governments and UT administrations to ensure availability of uninterrupted electric supply and other logistics as well as permission for these facilities to be manned by staff of the service providers. 
The move comes hours after Prime Minister Narendra Modi interacted with representatives of television news channels through a video conference. He said Monday the “lifetime challenge” of COVID-19 needed to be tackled through new and innovative solutions.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“The tireless efforts of the reporters, camerapersons and technicians are a great service to the nation. The media should counter pessimism and panic through positive communication. COVID-19 is a lifetime challenge and it needs to be tackled through new and innovative solutions,” Modi said during the video conference, according to a statement issued by the PM’s Office.
With the total number of reported cases of coronavirus crossing 450, and nine deaths being reported so far, state governments across the country have imposed a lockdown. 
In view of this, Sadhwani wrote, “The proper functioning of these networks is required not only to create awareness among people and to give important messages but also to keep the nation updated of the latest status.”  
He goes on to underscore how “fake and false news need to be avoided and good practices need to be promoted and these networks play a pivotal role in ensuring the same”. 
To ensure this, he highlighted the importance of information networks and infrastructure such as printing presses and the distribution of newspapers and magazines, television channels and DSNGs, cable operators, news agencies, radio and direct to home services. 
Also read: ‘Experimental’ drug that failed to cure ebola is now world’s best shot against COVID-19
 
