Zee News & News 18 India on Arab states, Ramdev breaks rules with ‘lauki’ juice on India TV
New Delhi: Prime time discussions Wednesday circled around the coronavirus (obviously!) and the remarks made by Delhi Minority Commission Chairman Zaraful-Islam Khan. Khan thanked Arab nations for their support to Indian Muslims Tuesday.
Most Hindi TV anchors were greatly agitated by this statement.
Zee News’ anchor Aman Chopra was feeling rather poetic, “Mere angne mein Muslim deshon ka kya kaam,” (What’s the need of Muslim nations in my land?).
Then he had a bad thought: “Ramzan ke mahine mein Hindustan ki barbaadi ke sapne dekh rahe hai,” (At the time of Ramzan, people are dreaming of India’s destruction).
Tarek Fateh, Pakistani journalist and occasional writer, sought to clarify what the Arabs actually meant, “Inko Arab mein pooch kaun raha hai. Yeh Arab unse baat nahi karte, yeh codeword hai Pakistan ka. Arabs ko toh pata nahi hai Hindustan kahan hai.” (Who is asking about them? This is all a codeword for Pakistan. Arabs don’t even know where India is.)

News 18 India’s anchor Amish Devgan was angry, “Arab deshon ke naam par Hindustan ko dhamkaya ja raha hai,” (Indians are being threatened in the name of Arabs).
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
On the show, BJP spokesperson Sambit Patra said, “Jo minority commission ne chitti daali hai woh unconstitutional aur anti-Indian statement hai,” (The letter and comments by the chairman of minority commission are both unconstitutional and anti-Indian.)
Patra continued, “He didn’t trust India’s judiciary so he felt the need to reach out to Arab Nations. He has threatened the sovereignty of India.”
Away from this, India TV had something very important to ask yoga guru Ramdev after he drank some lauki ka juice: “You had the juice right after doing yoga, can one drink the juice so quickly or should they wait for a while?”
Ramdev grinned — “Mera sharir ekdum swasth hai toh mujh par vishesh niyam lagu nahi hai, baaki jo yog abhyas karte hai woh 10 min baad le sakte hai,” (My body is very fit, so ordinary rules don’t apply to me. For others who do yoga, they should drink after 10 minutes).
He also suggested that viewers can add some lemon and mint to their lauki ka juice and promised that it would be so tasty that it would be hard to put it down. Okay then.

India Today’s anchor Rahul Kanwal had some “concrete evidence” and he didn’t let anyone forget that. Kanwal said, “Evidence has emerged that suggests China in early January knew about the fact that they had a raging contagion on their hands and that it could spread globally. Despite that for some mystifying reason the Chinese authority didn’t even reveal it to their own people so much so they went out to celebrate their Lunar New Year.”
“This is what has been insinuated so far. What’s new and very, very intriguing is that there are official documents that China knew and lied deliberately about,” he added.

ET Now’s Chandra R. Srikanth was in conversation with N.R. Narayan Murthy, founder of Infosys. Srikanth asked, “If you have to assess India’s response to Covid-19, are people happy about how we imposed the lockdown early?”
Murthy made a pros and cons list, “The positives are the fact that India recognised this danger pretty early and took steps to de-accelerate the virus. The PM has also taken a personal interest. The fact that political parties fully cooperated and didn’t politicise the issue is also a big positive.”
Listing the negatives, Murthy said, “But we have not been able to ramp up our testing facility. Even if we are able to test one lakh people a day, we would take 37 years to cover the entire population. It is a moving target.”

On NDTV 24×7, Vishnu Som came with some breaking news, “In a very important decision, the Home Ministry has decided that the movement of persons despite the lockdown will be allowed. This involves migrant workers, students, stranded tourists.”
Som noted, “This is a breakaway from what was decided earlier on the policy that wherever migrants or tourists or others were, they would stay over there in the interest of trying to prevent coronavirus.”
He also called for the need to designate nodal authorities and delegate standard protocol.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
