Lav Agarwal, a ‘reticent’ IIT grad, Andhra IAS officer who’s the face of India’s Covid fight
New Delhi: For over 40 days now, he has been appearing on our TV screens every evening to talk about how India has been faring in the battle against Covid-19.
He shares infection rates, talks about ICU beds, protection equipment, lockdowns and testing, among others, and generally tries to reassure the country through the media that there’s no reason to panic.
For Lav Agarwal, it could just be another day at the office. But the reality is, it isn’t. This is the biggest health emergency the planet has faced in decades, and Agarwal has become the face and voice of the Narendra Modi government’s efforts to tackle it in the second most populous country in the world.
The 48-year-old IAS officer is posted as a joint secretary in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, and is the union government’s official spokesperson on the Covid-19 crisis.
For a spokesperson in a government known for its aggressive communication strategies, Agarwal is said to be a reticent civil servant. And that reticence comes across even when ThePrint gets in touch with him and seeks his comments for this profile.
“I would insist that please don’t write about me. I don’t want to come in any news at all,” he replied through a text message. “I am only doing my job and come to news briefing as part of my job. If you wish to write, please write about health staff working on field who are taking all the risks and doing yeoman service.”
But a colleague in the health ministry says “every crisis has a hero”, and “Covid has made Lav one”.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Agarwal’s daily briefings on television evoke anticipation of the sort that Col Bikram Singh (who rose to be Chief of Army Staff) evoked with his briefings during the Kargil war, and Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson Nirupama Rao (later foreign secretary) evoked with her stinging responses and humour during the India-Pakistan stand-off in 2001-02, when the rivals were feared to be on the brink of nuclear war.
Agarwal, a 1996-batch officer of the Andhra Pradesh cadre, though, keeps playing it down, even telling his father, K.G. Agarwal, that a hero is not what he wants to be.
“He keeps telling me that he is just doing his duty…That so much media attention is unwarranted,” said the senior Agarwal, a chartered accountant in Saharanpur, Uttar Pradesh, where his son has attained celebrity status. Local media reports call him the pride of the town, and his father’s phone rings incessantly with congratulatory messages and calls.
“I have always been known in Saharanpur because I have practiced here as a CA for 45 years… But now I am known as Lav’s father,” K.G. Agarwal said proudly.
Also read: Is India’s Covid-19 curve flattening? Cases now double every 10 days, from 3 before lockdown
The civil services weren’t Lav Agarwal’s first choice for a career, his father said.
“When he was in Class 12, I wanted him to become a CA like me. He would often come and sit in my office…But one day, he told me ‘Papa, I don’t find this interesting… I want to go to IIT, instead,” the senior Agarwal recalled.
When his father told him that cracking the IIT exam wasn’t easy, Lav had said: “Don’t underestimate me… Let me try, if I don’t crack it, I will come become a CA.”
And crack the exam he did, in his first attempt, and joined IIT-Delhi to study mechanical engineering. His batchmates say he was “nerdy” — always attending classes and performing well in his exams — but also “always fun”.
“Lav was always a very interesting character,” said V.D. Singh Kochar, who studied and lived with him at the IIT-D hostel. “He had come from a small town to this prestigious institution in south Delhi, but he went from being a slightly shy guy to opening up to people from big cities in no time… A lot of people from small towns get overwhelmed with exposure; Lav took to it very naturally.”
He was never competitive, even though he was ambitious, Kochar said. “Back in the day, he had a blue motorbike, a Kawasaki… Almost the whole batch had used it once at least,” he said. “He was equally generous with his notes and stuff… Never the competitive kind.”
Also read: India is fighting Covid-19 like Liberia fought the Ebola outbreak
After IIT, Agarwal wanted to study abroad, but his father asked him to take the civil services exam. “If I take the exam, I’ll crack it,” he had told his father.
He finally made it through in 1996 on his third attempt, with an all-India rank of 21. “Even in earlier attempts, he cleared the written exams, but didn’t make it past the interview stage. When he got in, he got the 21st rank,” Agarwal senior said.
Allotted the Andhra Pradesh cadre, Agarwal spent several years in Hyderabad and other districts of the state, serving in different capacities, especially in the health and education department, before he came to Delhi in 2016 as joint secretary in the health ministry — a post he will hold until 2021.
While at the Centre, he has handled crucial portfolios like global health, mental health, technology and public health. Up until the Covid-19 crisis, Agarwal was one of the 10 joint secretaries in the ministry, a colleague of his in the ministry said. “Now, he is the most popular IAS officer in the country today,” the colleague said.
IAS officers seldom become public faces, but when the country is grappling with its biggest health crisis in more than a century, Agarwal is constantly in the public glare, more so than the Union health minister. This has given rise to much curiosity and some degree of envy.
“Being made the spokesperson of the government is a corollary to the portfolios he handles…They are directly connected,” the colleague said. “He is also from the same cadre as the secretary (Preeti Sudan).”
Given the portfolio of global health, Agarwal has travelled extensively across the world — probably the most in his ministry. He was involved in dealing with the World Health Organization (WHO), and was the one supervising checks at airports, quarantining, etc. during the initial days of Covid in India, making him suitable for the job of spokesperson, the colleague added.
“He has done whatever job he has gotten very well so far, during and before Covid… So to a lot of us, him becoming the face of things is not surprising — he has always been very good at his job.”
Another colleague from the ministry described Agarwal as extremely measured and diplomatic, yet very ambitious.
“He was known to never speak out of turn, and be very measured in his conduct even before this outbreak,” the second ministry official said. “All these qualities help when the country is dealing with such a huge crisis.”
Also read: These 10 cities have over half of India’s Covid-19 cases. Ahmedabad, Indore among top 5
Among journalists who have been covering his press conferences, the perception is that Agarwal is extremely adept at not giving specific answers to questions, even as he makes it a point to respond to each question after patiently listening to the reporter.
During each press conference, Agarwal promises to share more details or information the next day, but reporters say the next day never quite comes. After a recent press conference in a different context, when faced with a series of questions, Agarwal told reporters with folded hands: “Iss gareeb ko maaf karo, main itna hi bol sakta hoon” (Forgive this poor man, I can only say this much).
The second colleague agreed with reporters’ perceptions, explaining: “During a time like this, the government needs someone who will be very cautious in parting with information… You cannot have someone who wants to talk about everything he knows. In that sense, he is the ideal government spokesperson during a crisis situation.”
With inputs from Himani Chandna and Swagata Yadavar
Also read: Meerut cancer hospital wants Muslims to come only after getting Covid-19 negative test report
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
I love lav Agrawal and Arvind Kejriwal Combo for India… IITans are doing something finally!!
I am sorry to the offended people. He spoke about tablighi people because he was asked by media persons. And let’s be honest, we needed that classification that time to prevent panic in the unaffected parts.
Lets be clear here:  Tablighi people are not representative of a single community (In reality, several muslim groups themselves are critical of the TJ’s practices).
Hosting tourist visa holders to participate in an event is a criminal offence, hindu, christian or muslim.
There have been other gatherings all over the country towards the end of february as well. The crime that the Tablighi people did was to congregate, INSPITE of a widely announced Delhi government lockdown.
To add insult to injury, the behaviour of some the participants towards police and doctors and nurses was appalling.  And that is an offence, whether you are Tablighi, Timothy or Trimurti.
This is not a religious problem, this is a criminal offence. Just like corona doesn’t see religion, law and order shouldn’t either.
Mr Luv Agarwal the the right person who is doing his job extremely well. May God Bless him.
Even I feel proud today for Mr.Agrawal as he is a marwari , we the same one. But above all, if I have to think, he is an Indian & doing really well. At this time, we all should remember only one thing that we should work together to face this national crisis. once again, proud of you, Mr.Agrawal
Mr Lav Agrawal is performing an excellent job as a spokesperson of health ministry. As a regional head of Maharaja Agrasen Intellectual Forum I feel very proud of Mr Agrawal.
Can we be proud of him as a co Indian rather than a person from same community or region or state? It’s absolutely essential we forget this Marwari or Aggarwal or south north business and not even speak anywhere anytime as long as we believe we are Indians. No offense meant here to anyone though!
Incidentally I have met him more than once In hyd While worked as commissioner of Medical and health Dept and interacted  many times.
But I am honestly appreciating his skill and contribution as an IAS officer of all India service and doing best what he is supposed to so!
God bless him and all those who are working hard in this crisis times as public servants!
Thanks
Whether it is health emergency or financial or political emergency bureaucrats tend to echos their masters voice. In this case Mr Luv Agarwal doing his job. Nothing more, nothing less.  He must be very jolly and  generous, person.  No doubt about that, but term him’ Upright’ just because in his briefings he gave emphasis on Tablighi’s numbers. I think, on his part, this was straight communalisation of pandemic. It was uncalled for at least from health ministry’s level. It was often sounds like, Mr, Luv Agarwal representing Mr. Amit Shah’s Home Ministry. not the Health Ministry. In every press briefing, his mentioning of Tablighi’s numbers separately gave fodder to hatemongers and there after Muslim bashing goes on uninterruptedly. Finally UN and WHO has to intervene, OIC send stern messages, sensing the backclash PM has to reiterate and evoke India’s secular values, then after this ‘Uprightness’ of Mr Agarwal vanished.
But above all, Nice profile. Once can sense personality from all angels.
