TikTok donates protective suits, masks worth Rs 100 crore to India to fight coronavirus
New Delhi: Popular Chinese video-making app TikTok Wednesday announced the donation of 4,00,000 hazmat protective suits and 2,00,000 masks for doctors and medical staff who are on the frontline of fighting the coronavirus pandemic in India. 
The total cost of the protective equipment is Rs 100 crore. 
In an official statement issued Wednesday, TikTok said it has collaborated with the Ministry of Textiles in India in this regard.
The Chinese app even praised the Modi government’s efforts and said, “The Government of India has been making concerted efforts to contain the spread of the virus and through this donation we want to contribute towards this effort.”
“With support from the Union Ministry of Textile, this essential gear, which meets the prescribed standards and guidelines, is being handed over to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India,” it added.
The statement also said the company has donated 2,00,000 masks to Maharashtra and Delhi governments as well.
Also read: India receives second batch of medical supplies for Covid-19 from China
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
In a bid to ensure that Indians adhere to the government’s nationwide lockdown, TikTok has launched a campaign in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme, called ‘GharBaithoIndia’, in which celebrities such as singer-rapper Honey Singh and actor Riteish Deshmuk participated.
With 119 million active users in India and with about 300 million downloads in the first 11 months of 2019 alone, TikTok is hugely popular among Indians. 
The Shanghai-based online platform used for making dance and music videos is popular across all sections and regions of India.
TikTok’s contribution comes on a day that marks 70 years of diplomatic relations between India and China. 
Chinese Ambassador to India Sun Weidong took to Twitter to show China’s appreciation for the same.
“Nowadays, #China–#India relations stand at a new starting point & usher in new opportunities. We should enhance mutual trust, focus on cooperation, manage differences & seek common development. Let’s take a “dragon-elephant tango” on a glorious journey in the next #70 years!”
Nowadays, #China–#India relations stand at a new starting point & usher in new opportunities. We should enhance mutual trust, focus on cooperation, manage differences & seek common development. Let's take a “dragon-elephant tango” on a glorious journey in the next #70 years! pic.twitter.com/GI4RlbUSdB
— Sun Weidong (@China_Amb_India) April 1, 2020

“Today – 1 April 2020 – is the 70th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the Republic of #India and the People’s Republic of #China | Congratulations and best wishes to all friends in India and China. Wish all of them peace, prosperity and good health,” tweeted Indian ambassador to China Vikram Misri.
Today – 1 April 2020 – is the 70th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the Republic of #India and the People’s Republic of #China | Congratulations and best wishes to all friends in India and China. Wish all of them peace, prosperity and good health. pic.twitter.com/utMS34mDRl
— Vikram Misri (@VikramMisri) April 1, 2020

Also read: Why India’s wealthy happily donate to god and govt but loathe helping needy and poor
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
***Please ask Smruti ji and Modiji to not accept Hazmat Suits from Tiktok**
Request you to please see the entire content of the link I am sharing.
