How Army-IAF fight over Apache helicopters cost India an extra Rs 2,500 crore
Army and IAF fought over Apache choppers, costing us Rs 2,500 crore more. Blame their silos
The purchase of 28 Apache helicopters is a prime example of how India could have worked out a better deal had the Air Force and Army not acted in silos, writes Snehesh Alex Philip.
Hardest journey Babu Khan ever made, carrying bodies of his two sons killed in Delhi riots
In Northeast Delhi’s Mustafabad, Babu Khan made the most gruelling journey of his life on foot, bearing the dead bodies of his two young sons. The bodies were first kept at their home in Old Mustafabad. See the heart-wrenching pictures taken by Praveen Jain.
Tanks, fighter aircraft will soon be on their way out like Sony Walkman: Army chief
Speaking at a seminar, Army chief M.M. Naravane said the “military icons of the 20th century”, like tanks and fighter aircraft, were on their way out in much the same way as the Sony Walkman was made redundant by new technology. The Army, he added, is looking at the possible induction of laser and directed-energy weapons, reports Snehesh Alex Philip.
Hindu Mahasabha plans gaumutra party with cow-dung cakes to fight coronavirus in India
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
To ensure the coronavirus doesn’t spread in Delhi, the Hindu Mahasabha has decided to organise a ‘gaumutra party’ on the lines of tea parties, according to its president, Chakrapani Maharaj. He also said there is a need to create greater awareness among the people on how gaumutra (cow urine), gobar (cow-dung) can help eliminate the coronavirus. Neelam Pandey reports.
Modi govt ministers prefer Oxford, Harvard for their children’s education and not IIT, IIM
Of the 56 ministers in Modi’s council, 12 have sent their children to foreign varsities. These ministers include Rajnath Singh, Nirmala Sitharaman, S. Jaishankar and Ravi Shankar Prasad, reports Shanker Arnimesh.
Delhi shooter Shahrukh — college dropout who flirted with trouble & got gun ‘for pleasure’
Shahrukh, the man who was photographed pointing a gun at the Delhi Police during last week’s rioting, is an aspiring model, a TikTok buff and loves fast bikes. He always aspired for fame and dreamed to see his picture on the cover of a fashion magazine. Read his detailed profile in this report by Ananya Bhardwaj and Samyak Pandey.
Why Modi proves strong leaders don’t always bother about good economics
Data from a study conducted in Australia, as well as experience of the last six years of the Modi government, prove that strong leaders do not necessarily lead to good economics, writes Shekhar Gupta.
