Yogi govt wont ‘defy tradition’, will hold Ayodhya Ram Navami Mela despite COVID-19 threat
Despite coronavirus, lakhs to gather in Ayodhya because this ‘Ram Navami is different’
The Uttar Pradesh government is choosing tradition over expert advice and pushing ahead with the millennia-old Ayodhya Ram Navami Mela despite the coronavirus pandemic. The mela (fair), which draws lakhs of pilgrims from across the country, will be held from 25 March to 2 April, reports Shanker Arnimesh.
From Kashmir to coronavirus, how Modi’s silver bullet Jaishankar is keeping troubles away
In Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s second term, External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar has turned out to be his silver bullet on the foreign policy front, splendidly managing one crisis after another, even as he lends his extraordinary intellect and pragmatic spine to the ruler in Delhi, reports Jyoti Malhotra
From Babri to CAA, Javed Akhtar to Owaisi, Muslims are tested on the right adjectives
From the time of Babri Masjid and Ram Mandir to CAA and NRC — the problem of Muslims in India has been one of finding the right ‘adjective’. We have also accepted, over the years, a binary: The ‘good Muslim’ and the ‘bad Muslim’ — one who aids and carries out terror attacks, and the other kind, the ‘good Muslim’, who is almost a Hindu, writes Kaveree Bamzai.
Scindia’s entry hurts BJP and Modi more than any other dynast’s. Here is why
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The BJP has been as dynastic as any other party. It’s just that when the opposition parties field a dynast in the election, BJP leaders project it as evidence of dynastic politics. But when the BJP does the same, it’s projected as realpolitik, a political masterstroke. Read the article by D.K. Singh to know more.
How Modi govt is quietly ‘revolutionising’ the training of IAS, IPS, IRS officers
Generalist, bureaucratic and status-quoist — these are some of the criticisms levelled at civil servants in India. The Modi government is quietly working to change this perception, through some sweeping and controversial reforms undertaken in the civil services, reports Sanya Dhingra.
Arunachal girl Niki Lego — from PR executive to US Army officer, and now a social media star
Niki Lego had joined the US Army in June 2019, after she passed the recruitment interview, but with her picture in the uniform doing the rounds only now, many assumed she has just entered the force, reports Bismee Taskin.
Journalism in the time of corona: This is the biggest story of our lives
A billion-plus people expect us to be around, watching, reporting, editing, recording this for posterity, blowing the whistle on injustices and state failures, writes Shekhar Gupta in this week’s National Interest.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
