Two senior IAS officers in PMO appointed to World Bank, World Trade Organisation 
New Delhi: The Modi government has appointed two members of the Prime Minister’s Office, senior IAS officers Rajiv Topno and Brajendra Navnit, to the the World Bank and the World Trade Organisation (WTO), respectively. 
The appointments come at a time when both the organisations are expected to play a key role in helping developing economies recover from the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and revive global trade.
Topno has been appointed senior advisor to the Washington-based World Bank, and Navnit as the Ambassador to the Permanent Mission for India (PMI) at the WTO in Geneva. 
Both the posts are considered plum, and hold the rank of joint secretary in the Government of India.
Topno, a 1996 Gujarat-cadre IAS officer, is private secretary to PM Narendra Modi, while Navnit, a 1999 Tamil Nadu-cadre officer, serves as joint secretary in the PMO. 
A highly-placed source said the post of the ambassador to the Permanent Mission for India has traditionally been held by officers of the Indian Foreign Service (IFS), saying Navnit’s appointment “in that sense is aberrational” and in the nature of a “reward”.
Also Read: New PMO faces and 11 non-IAS joint secretaries in Modi govt’s 3rd lockdown reshuffle
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Given the global pandemic and the scale of its economic fallout, the World Bank and the WTO could assume greater significance in the process of economic and trade revival in countries, and the Modi government would, thus, require trusted officers in the institutions. 
Between April and May, the World Bank approved two aid tranches of $1 billion to support India’s efforts for providing social assistance to poor and vulnerable households as part of its Covid-19 response. 
There were other appointments too Thursday. An Indian Railway Traffic Service (IRTS) officer of the 2000 batch, Anwar Hussain Shaik, has been appointed under Navnit as the counsellor in the PMI to the WTO.  
Ravi Kota, an IAS officer of the 1993 batch of the Assam and Meghalaya cadre, has been appointed as minister (finance) at the Embassy of India in Washington DC, under the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA). Kota is currently serving as joint secretary in the 15th Finance Commission under the DEA. 
Also Read: Over 80% of households in India lost income due to lockdown, says study
