India set to receive 6.5 lakh Covid-19 testing kits from China today
New Delhi: India will receive over 5 lakh rapid antibody testing kits and about 1 lakh RNA extraction kits from China for Covid-19 detection and treatment. The kits have been shipped from China, and are likely to arrive Thursday.
The imports have been facilitated by the Ministry of External Affairs, with the Indian mission in Beijing and the Indian consulate in Guangzhou playing a key role, MEA sources told ThePrint.
“MEA has been at the forefront of the GoI Covid response to ensure vital medical supplies from other countries. A total of 6.5 lakh testing kits will be received, all custom cleared Wednesday late night, have left (China) this morning for India. This should reach today,” an MEA official said.
In the first lot, India will be receiving 3 lakh rapid antibody testing kits from China’s Wondfo Biotech Co and 2.5 lakh kits from Zhuhai Livzon Diagnostics Inc.
New Delhi will also be obtaining 1 lakh RNA extraction kits from MGI Shenzhen, the sources added.
“A total of 650,000 kits, including Rapid Antibody Tests and RNA Extraction Kits have been despatched early today from Guangzhou Airport to #India,” Vikram Misri, Ambassador of India to China, tweeted Thursday.
#IndiaFightsCoronavirus A total of 650,000 kits, including Rapid Antibody Tests and RNA Extraction Kits have been despatched early today from Guangzhou Airport to #India | #2019nCoV #StayHomeSaveLives @MEAIndia @HarshShringla @DrSJaishankar
— Vikram Misri (@VikramMisri) April 16, 2020

We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Modi govt placed order for 7 lakh kits with China firms
The development comes even as the Narendra Modi government gave its nod to produce made-in-India rapid testing kits as the Chinese shipments got delayed earlier. 
On 4 April, India’s apex medical research body, ICMR, approved the use of these tests in the Covid-19 clusters (areas with a high number of cases), as well as those with large migration and a high number of evacuees.
Rapid antibody tests are prick-based tests that can detect the presence of coronavirus antibodies. They provide quick results and don’t need to be conducted in laboratories.
The government had placed an order for 7 lakh kits with Chinese firms, which were supposed to deliver the consignment by 8 April. Overall, the ICMR has invited bids for 45 lakh testing kits.
India currently has more than 10,000 active cases and reported over 400 deaths till now.
