WHO and China covered Tedros’ past — but what is worrying is how India fell for it
A bipartisan US House Committee has finally done what everyone else was hesitant to do. It has asked for Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus and the World Health Organization’s communications with China. The very fact that a bipartisan committee chose to do this is the beginning of the end for a man who has clearly been a consummate player of cronyism since day one.
Tedros has always been a master of schmoozing both the very worst of dictators and NGOs. How did the renowned malaria expert and current head of WHO manage this? Well, you just need to look at his last press conference. He said two things — that he had been racially abused and this abuse had largely come from Taiwan. He had been racially abused, but the point was that he used it to deflect from the genuine claims of incompetence levelled against him by those like US President Donald Trump.
The racism issue was carefully couched to shore up Western liberal social justice warrior (SJW) support. The Taiwan bit was to signal Tedros’ continuing loyalty to China. It worked. Papers like The New York Times (via Reuters) and The Washington Post flagged the racism bit — quoting him and attributing his outburst to past attacks in January by Taiwan. They, however, avoided pointing out that his accusations against the Taiwanese government were, in fact, without evidence — putting the Taiwanese rejection in quotes, while passing off Tedros’ allegations almost as a matter of fact. Unsurprisingly, China too came to the defence of Tedros, going along with the unproven allegation against Taiwan. Curiously, the Taiwanese investigation found no articles of Taiwan attacking him in January, but several from China were found “apologising” to him for Taiwan.
Also read: All about WHO, the global health watchdog attacked as ‘Chinese Health Organization’
This masterful manoeuvre is actually symptomatic of Tedros’ career. How else do you explain he was an empowered official of the Derg military junta regime of Haile Miriam Mengistu and then Ethiopia’s health minister under the same people who fought and overthrew the Derg? How else do you explain that the man who was foreign minister of one of the world’s most oppressive regimes, holding many thousand political prisoners, had this part of his record almost entirely suppressed while highlighting his heath credentials? His much-talked-about “achievements in health sector” too were mostly driven by NGOs, since Ethiopia never had the capability to manage its problems, so it did what funders asked it to do.
But this brings us to the dirty side of NGOs — the whitewashing of crimes they provide in lieu of access, programme implementation and rampant cronyism.
Unsurprisingly, Tedros’ chief adviser is Senait Fisseha, who was working for one such NGO  — the Susan Thomas Buffett foundation. See the link here? Provide government access and deliverables, allow NGOs to raise funds. The same NGOs then perhaps whitewashes his record as foreign minister of a barbaric regime and sanitises his Wikipedia profile to exclude said HR record. Said beneficiary then rewards said NGO person with a plum post.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: Covid-19: Dr WHO gets prescription wrong
The cronyism that its chief indulges in, of course, is all-pervasive across the WHO. The same man who ran a bitter campaign against him — Dr David Nabarro now is a special envoy, defending him and no longer attacking Tedros with damning reports as he once did. Another man known to have privately opposed Tedros — Bruce Aylward — is brought out as a talking head during times of crisis. Sadly, Bruce made a fool of himself by refusing to acknowledge the existence of Taiwan’s problems on live TV. But Tedros resolutely demonstrated to Beijing that he could turn any of his chosen people into Beijing apologists.
One reason that Tedros has gotten away with so much brazen cronyism is that America pays little to no attention to global public health, save pouring in money as a sugar daddy. What else explains the fact that chief adviser Senait is a pro-choice activist while a pro-life US president continues to provide money to WHO to channelise into her favoured pro-choice schemes? Tedros’ election to the WHO itself was a result of this US apathy. As commentator Chitra Subramaniam describes it, China started a scheme for global health colonisation and won because America didn’t think it was important enough. Forget the fact that the Chinese leveraged their investments across Africa to force the African Union to back Ted, but also got Pakistan to withdraw its candidate who was opposing him, sources say.
Also read: Why Modi, Trump & others are angry at WHO’s handling of Covid-19 crisis 
What is deeply worrying, however, is how India got swayed into supporting Tedros. Informed sources tell me China’s main “lollipop” to India was futile jargon like “south-south cooperation” that glazes our diplomats’ eyes. Worse, India’s diplomatic credentials helped in covering up Tedros’ shady past and the fact his main backer was a Communist dictatorship. Unsurprisingly, it also evaded the health ministry’s notice that the man from India that Tedros chose for his Covid-19 panel is Srinath Reddy, a man who rose during the UPA rule and was linked to the Public Health Foundation of India — an institute whose FCRA licence was cancelled by the Narendra Modi government for lobbying.
Since WHO reps sit in at government meetings, it could mean the government is effectively providing detailed information to the same PHFI, albeit indirectly.
While the US Congress has woken up, and so has Trump, the question is when will India learn any institutional lessons from when we got swayed by China?
The author is a senior fellow at the Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies. He tweets @iyervval. Views are personal.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
The writer credibility is to be questioned.
Trump agent writings to divert incompetence of big brother.  He committed himalayan blunder by visiting India during peak times of vitus. .
India, under Modi, remains the Colonial Communist State founded by Gandhi, Nehru, Naiker, Ambedkar, and others. Besides Modi’s external and internal policy remains “Multi Appeasement”
At least the WHO gave one serious Wrong missive to all, which has proved fatal across the World.
” A respiratory Virus does not spread thru the Air space around a patient””
i think, india campaigned for Soumya Swaminathan… and missed the plot..
Haha FAKE NEWS!!!
Very, very taught full article Mr Mitra. You have  taught a lesson to someone none of us know. What he did not offer you the best single malt at the last cocktail party you were at before the lockdown?
Fan of peter Hossan , aren’t you?..
Shocking (or not) how everyone jumps on the bandwagon to diss someone on the evidence of assumptions and sketchy connections. It’s all a hoax folks was not WHO’s statement
India seldom involves itself in the Internal affairs of other nations beyond South Asia. India is never seen as a Geopolitical power broker. Perhaps this would be a learning opportunity for India. India should form tactical power alliances like NATO with like-minded nations like Israel, Japan, France, Germany, and  Vietnam.
WHO chief is like any other job in indian politics, based in crony organisation and ngo funding. We have to now suffer these well oiled thick skinned useless people. Any way WHO chief can be kicked out with sanctions against China?
@Savy: “WHO chief is like any other job in indian politics…” Lol!! 
Clearly, you don’t see a difference between elections, voted for by millions of people and a WHO chief election where some hundred vote & geopolitics matters??!!
Did you grow ignorant or didn’t change since your birth ;))??!!
Tedros held only a B.Sc. degree, and was a junior health officer in 1991 aged 26 years when Derg regime fell in Ethiopia. He went to Graduate School in England after that. To link him to Mengistu Hilemariam’s misdeeds appears unfair to Dr Tedros.
I fully agree with Prof RK Jaitley. We should watch what we post and say.
It’s so sad to see allegations on WHO and it’s chief in a time like this. In my eyes, Dr Tedros is the first ever WHO Director who could stir up a global public health campaign against an emerging pandemic. What have past Directors done eg in 1981-82 when HIV emerged?
But cheap media like yours would always hamper progress and solidarity.
India stand Independent don’t be partner of the herd.Americans and its cousin brothers are not always right.Look at how Trump treats hie own appointed people are treated? He wakes up in the morning and fires his people using Tweeter?His people have no room to fight this president. Tedros is lucky in that WHO runs from Switzerland and not NY otherwise Trump would send a tweet and fire him?
This is not just the right time to run a campaign against individuals of WHO when we are facing a global threat.There might be shortcomings  but no inernational organisation has been perfect in the past including WHO.The US  has failed miserably to contain the  endemic and the president is looking for a punching bag and the easiest target seems to be the WHO at the moment.But, is it right for President Trump to solely blame WHO for the pandemic ? Abdolutely not.This is not the time to weaken the institution as in spite of it’s short coming WHO is doing commendable job.As far as the allegation on collusion between WHO and China, the truth will come later but we have to accept the fact that it was good that endemic started in a country with strong economy and health system as  the damage would have been much worse if at all it started in another country.India should have independent foreign policy and should not toe the line of others for that matter even USA.Its time to strengthen the global efforts under the banner of WHO.
@C tetseo – Which world do you live in?? WHO is CORRUPT & SOLD OUT as the UNO!!
Very good, threw light on so many shady areas. It not only exposes Tedros as a unscrupulous man but throws more light on the WHO. The so-called world body that is in charge of the world’s health is just another crony organization with so many crooks running it.
Thanks Mr Mitra for all the hard work you must have put in.
Even the UN is equally of questionable credentials. There have been instances wherein it is obvious that the UN’s Asian officials had taken bribes to withdraw the UN protection force to allow certain military to kill civilians.
Wasn’t our Sashi Tharoor  deprived of the plum post of UN Secretary General by some *ism*  of  some permanent members of the U. N security council. Could he have helped his birth happening in Kerala, considered a communist state in the eyes of the world. Our own people publicise that canard.
D.Raja: “Could he have.. Kerala, considered a communist state in the eyes of the world.. canard.”
Our own people publicize that canard??!! Lol!!
I wonder if you ever read the present & history of EVIL communists who have killed innocent human beings just like Islamic invaders!! Please do take a clue from the the soviet union, India through covert communist Indira Gandhi/congress or the Chinese Communist party!!
