Indian brands can’t wake up after lockdown. Decoding hoarders, lamenters, indulgers will help
What explains the peculiar behaviour of Indians as the country eases restrictions after a strict coronavirus-induced lockdown? In March, when there were fewer than hundred Covid-19 deaths, the Narendra Modi government imposed one of the strictest national lockdowns in the world, shutting down trains, planes, malls, colleges, schools, offices and public transport. There was panic buying and hoarding.
Now, almost three months later, when India’s Covid-19 cases have spiked and claimed more than 8,000 lives, the panic and fear seem to have vapourised.
I will use the Kübler-Ross Model to explain this drastic change in the behaviour of Indians. Defined by Swiss-American psychiatrist Elisabeth Kübler-Ross in her 1969 book On Death and Dying, the psychological model comprises five stages, which are: denial, anger, bargaining, depression, and acceptance. These ‘five stages of grief’ can easily be applied to Indian consumer behaviour during the coronavirus pandemic.
Also read: Lipstick effect helped brands survive crises before. It can now aid Covid-hit companies
Each stage of the Kübler-Ross Model created its own set of consumer–types, displaying traits that represented large constituencies of similar-behaving individuals.
Also read: Indians are shopping only for essentials even though economy is reopening
Denial produced five consumer types:
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: Modi, migrants and monsoon make rural India top consumer equity bet
Anger added two consumer-types to the mix:
Bargaining and Depression produced consumers with new traits:
With Acceptance, the last of the character traits surfaced:
Also read: RBI survey shows consumer confidence at record lows, Indians pessimistic about economy, jobs
Given the journey of the Indian consumer, what were brands supposed to do during the lockdown and pandemic? Coping strategies in the Kübler-Ross Model are quite well defined.
Denial and Anger require effective information and communication. They increase awareness, build faith in expert opinions and hold out hope. Most brands in India fell short here. They just went into an advertising hiatus.
Bargaining needs emotional support for consumers, reaffirmation that irrespective of what is happening, we are there for you. Very few brands did that. No consumers, no communication was the general logic.
Depression and Acceptance demand guidance and direction. Some brands are making a comeback — such as the Asian Paints with its new ad and the Kotak Mahindra Bank. Hyundai Creta is making the right noises. But most brands are yet to wake up from three months of slumber.
The last three months have been a journey through uncharted territories. Consumers are in turmoil and brands are in shock. Maybe Unlock 1.0 will help both the consumers and brands start adjusting to the ‘new’ normal.
The author was Group CEO of Zee Telefilms & Founder Chairman of Dentsu India. He is currently Chairman of Mogae Media. Views are personal.
