Passengers to reach airport two hours early with protective gear when flights resume: CISF
New Delhi: Airport security Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) has made a new necessary plan for air passengers post lockdown imposed to prevent the spread of coronavirus. In the new plan submitted to the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA), CISF said that when flight operation resumes “passengers reaching timing at the airport two hours before their flight timing with proper protective gear eg; mask, gloves, and sanitisers.”
CISF also urged the civil aviation ministry that sanitiser bottles can be also placed at every exit and entry gates of the airports for passengers and employees.
Flying with a seat vacant between every two people could be the ‘new norms’ for air passengers when schedule commercial flights resume, CISF said in the new plan.
According to the officials, the plan is under consideration and the idea behind it is to seek staggering flights to avoid crowding at airports at any time.
“We have proposed a new plan incorporating necessary precaution in view of the change of circumstances due to COVID-19. This has been sent to the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) for consideration,” GA Ganapathy, Special Director (Airport) of CISF, told ANI.
Further, CISF advised all the airlines that, airlines make it clear for the passengers to whom so ever booking tickets they should give details of their home/self-quarantine history.
Also read: Delhi airport is working 24×7, operating 22 cargo flights per day for medical supplies
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
 
If any passengers flying after quarantine history, CISF will screening them in isolation checking point where CISF officers are covered full personal protective equipment (PPE) suit. Airlines crew will offer sanitisers to every onboard passenger, as per the plan.
Passenger flight operations in India are suspended from March 25, due to coronavirus.
As of now, there is no clarity from the government to resume flights operation. Minister of Civil Aviation (MoCA) Hardeep Puri tweeted, “The current Lockdown on both domestic & international passenger flights is till April 15. A decision to restart the flights after this period remains to be taken. If required, we will have to assess the situation on a case by case basis.”
Civil Aviation Ministry, Airport Authority Of India (AAI), Director General Of Civil Aviation (DGCA) and other stakeholders are working together on how to resume the operation post lockdown.
