Viral post that says US CEO redesigned India map to laud Modi on Covid-19 is 4 years old
New Delhi: You’ve probably come across the post on social media — a US CEO — an NRI by some accounts — has “redesigned” the Indian map to depict its states as countries with equivalent populations (UP=Brazil, Rajasthan=UK, etc). This was done, the post claims, to laud the efforts of the Modi government and “explain to his employees” that India is “indirectly handling Covid-19 situation of so many countries”.
However, the post, which names neither the CEO nor the company he purportedly leads, is a hoax because the redesigned map is at least four years old.
Even so, the post has been shared on several platforms, including WhatsApp, Facebook and Twitter.
On WhatsApp, it has been shared with the following message, in Hindi as well as English. 
“This is Indian map redesigned by an American CEO where he marked the Indian states population which is almost equal to the population of some of the countries. He tried to explain to his employees that India is indirectly handling the Covid-19 situation of so many countries. It’s about the management of the problem in an efficient manner. He praised Modiji in this unique way. The world is recognising the efforts of Modiji but some insider slaves and traitors are still criticising Modiji for mismanagement of Covid-19 in India.”
On Facebook, too, the post is doing the rounds in English as well as Hindi with more than 700 shares. 

We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
This is Indian map redesigned by an American CEO where he marked the Indian states population which is almost equal to…
Mahesh Mittal यांनी वर पोस्ट केले सोमवार, १३ एप्रिल, २०२०

#अमेरिका के एक NRI ने, जो कि अमेरिकन कम्पनी का CEO भी है, उसने भारतीय मैप को RE-DESIGN  किया है, अपने कर्मचारियों को…
Reeta Gulati यांनी वर पोस्ट केले शनिवार, ११ एप्रिल, २०२०
On Twitter, a user shared the post with the claim that the CEO is an NRI. 
#अमेरिका के एक NRI ने, जो कि अमेरिकन कम्पनी का CEO भी है, उसने भारतीय मैप को RE-DESIGN  किया है,  जनसंख्या के अनुसार हिन्दुस्तान के प्रत्येक प्रदेश की जनसंख्या विश्व के किस देश के लगभग समान है। हिन्दुस्तान का प्रधानमंत्री एक साथ कितने देशों की जनसंख्या को सम्भाल रहे है… pic.twitter.com/gv8ca6Rzsb
— संगीता शर्मा (@sangeetatsharma) April 13, 2020

Also Read: UP doctor dies, social media posts claim it was after she was attacked by Covid-19 patient
However, the map has been traced at least four years back to 2016, long before Covid-19 was first identified in Wuhan, China.
In April 2016, it was shared by Norwegian diplomat and former minister Erik Solheim in a post about the growth in Indian population.
In collaboration with SM HoaxSlayer
Also Read: Rahul & Priyanka Gandhi didn’t ‘break curfew to visit friends’, viral video is from December
