People of Kerala’s Kasargod using water route to reach Karnataka for medical needs
Bengaluru: With roads between Kerala’s Kasargod district and Karnataka blocked at the insistence of the B.S. Yediyurappa government, people from Kerala have been using the water route to reach Mangaluru under the Covid-19 lockdown, it has emerged.
Residents of Kasargod who did not wish to be identified told ThePrint that people have been trying to reach Karnataka through boats, via the Arabian Sea as well as the Talapady river, for their medical and other needs.
People of Kasargod have to rely on health infrastructure in Mangaluru, Udupi and Manipal regions of Karnataka under normal circumstances, but under the Covid-19 lockdown, these avenues are not available to them.
Karnataka CM Yediyurappa has made it clear that his state will not open its borders, fearing a further spread of the novel coronavirus as Kasargod has one of the highest number of positive cases in Kerala, and has even compared opening the borders to “embracing death”.
Also read: Woman’s death on sealed border triggers Kerala-Karnataka battle, Pinarayi writes to PM Modi
Complaints about such attempts have been lodged with the Mangaluru district administration, and the state minister in-charge of the district, Kota Srinivas Poojary, has sought the intervention of the police.
A senior police officer who did not wish to be identified said: “We had received information from the local villagers living along the Talapady river that there were people who were entering our state through small boats using the river. So, immediately, it was brought to the attention of our police and coastal security personnel. They have increased their patrolling.”
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The officer added that there were a few Karnataka fishermen who had been found fishing along the state border, but they returned in a few days. “In the same way, there may have been some fishermen who would have used the river to come towards Karnataka (from Kerala),” the officer said.
R. Chethan, the superintendent of police (coastal security) for Udupi district, said the police have enhanced patrolling along the coastline to ensure that such incidents of people trying to cross over do not take place.
“We have two boats patrolling and keeping a watch 24×7. The coastal points are completely sealed and we have officials manning every point of entry,” Chethan said.
Also read: ‘All we saw was death, but doctors helped’: How Kerala couple, 93 and 88, was cured of Covid-19
Mangaluru district officials told ThePrint that borders with Kerala continues to be sealed, and vehicular movement, including for medical emergencies, has been completely suspended.
Talapady, also the name of a check-post on the Kerala-Karnataka border, is only open for transporting essential commodities, while all 17 roads connecting the state have been shut by the police by dumping soil and gravel.
Kerala has cried foul over these decisions, alleging that this “inhuman act” by Karnataka has led to five persons dying in Kasargod due to unavailability of immediate medical help.
But Karnataka points out that six of the nine Covid-19-positive cases in Mangaluru came from Kerala, and thus it is necessary to keep the border sealed to “break the chain”.
Kasargod district has 119 coronavirus-positive cases, and 10,731 persons are placed under quarantine.
Also read: Power struggle between two top ministers adds to Karnataka’s coronavirus troubles
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Because if kasrgod developed then most of the people of Karnataka will benefit… that’s May be one of the strong reason in my personal opinion.so the poor community at large are humble with the Karnataka Government. So joint venture between the two states will benefit all
Because if kasrgod developed then most of the people of Karnataka will benefit… that’s May be one of the strong reason in my personal opinion.so the poor community at large are humble with the Karnataka Government
Because if kasrgod developed then most of the people of Karnataka will benefit… that’s May be one of the strong reason in my personal opinion.so the poor community at large are humble with the Karnataka Government
