ABP debunks coronavirus myths, NDTV India on ‘pheeka’ Holi due to virus
New Delhi: Prime time debates Thursday were quite busy with many issues of national importance — the continuing panic over the coronavirus outbreak, suspended AAP leader Tahir Hussain’s arrest and a new execution date for the 16 December gangrape-murder convicts.
ABP News’ Avinash Kumar Rai reported that the coronavirus was also accompanied by a lot of misinformation on social media. From the cow dung cure to consumption of alcohol increasing risk of infection, Rai promised his viewers that he would help them filter these rumours.
First up, “Do hand dryers reduce the risk of coronavirus?”
Despite being a no-brainer, Rai seemed rather pleased with himself when he debunked this myth as false.
Aaj Tak made a couple of not-so-subtle mentions of an exclusive interview with Tahir Hussain, who they said had “evaded the police for eight days before finally being arrested Thursday”.
In his interview, Hussain continuously asserted, “Yeh galat inzaam lagaye jaa rahe hai” (I am being wrongly accused).

We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
NDTV India brought us an interesting ground report where they found that “coronavirus ne holi ke rang pheeke kar diye” (coronavirus has dampened the festive spirit of Holi). Delhi’s Sadar Bazaar witnessed a dip in the sales of gulal (colours) and pichkaris (water cannons) ahead of the festival in light of the outbreak.
Zee News claimed that the biggest goal of Asha Devi, the 16 December victim’s mother, was to see her rapists hanged. “Bahut lamba sangharsh dekha hai” (she has gone through a long struggle). The channel claimed that it will not give up either till she receives justice.
On India Today, anchor Shiv Aroor asked Vikram Singh, former UP DGP, “How does this look to you? Suspended AAP leader Tahir Hussain… he claims his innocence but he’s been on the run for one full week before getting arrested.”
Singh was rather sarcastic in his reply, “It is difficult to find an accused who accepts responsibility for committing a crime. Therefore, I would not take his denial seriously”.
In “bad news for the salaried”, NDTV 24×7 informed viewers that the government has cut the employee provident fund interest rate. It is now down to the same rate as it was in 2012 and 2013 and is the lowest in seven years.
Republic anchor Arnab Goswami once again attacked “Lutyens media”, perhaps this is the theme of the week. He said, “Lutyens lobby stands exposed today…I will show videos of how a bloodthirsty murderous mob tried to lynch the police.”
Goswami exclaimed, “Bring the evidence!”
“Pictures don’t lie,” he added. Oh, but they do Mr Goswami!
Sambit Patra, BJP spokesperson and perennial guest at Republic recalled a London bridge tale except it wasn’t a rhyme. “I am reminded of one scene on London bridge, when a terrorist was captured. The police immediately fired and killed the man.”
Patra added, “There were no debates anywhere… But I am astonished that in this country, we debate when police take action against wrong doers.”
“Damned if you do, and damned if you don’t,” he bellowed.

Times Now anchor Padmaja Joshi could perhaps use some lessons in being sympathetic while questioning. She asked Asha Devi, “You have been going to court for the past seven years now, do you think that they will be executed this time?”
“Owing to lawyer A.P. Singh (lawyer of convicts) and his tactics, the judgment has taken so long.”
Asha Devi, despite Joshi’s provocations was rather levelheaded, “I know that justice will win on 20 March… this is the fourth date that has been decided.”
