Amitabh Bachchan, Rajinikanth feature in short film ‘Family’ to promote social distancing
New Delhi: Amitabh Bachchan, Rajinikanth, Mohanlal, Prosenjit Chatterjee and other iconic actors from across the country came together for the made-at-home short film ‘Family’, which spreads awareness about the importance of staying at home during the coronavirus pandemic.
The film, released Monday by entertainment channel Sony TV, also features actors Chiranjeevi, Diljit Dosanjh, Priyanka Chopra, Ranbir Kapoor, Shiv Rajkumar, Sonalee Kulkarni and Alia Bhatt. It was virtually directed by noted advertisement director Prasoon Pandey.

The film, which has been trending on Twitter, is premised around Amitabh Bachchan’s misplaced pair of sunglasses, which all the eleven actors “attempt” to find. Each actor shot their scene in their homes, which was then edited and put together. 
The film is part of Bachchan’s ‘We are One’ initiative, supported by Sony Pictures Entertainment and Kalyan Jewellers. The initiative will provide ration to 1 lakh daily wage labourers of the All India Film Employees Confederation.
“When you see that the cause is greater than the idea you dreamt of… There is just immense joy and gratitude for all my colleagues and friends in the making of this historic effort! We are one and we shall overcome!” Bachchan tweeted as he shared the video. 
T 3493 – When you see that the cause is greater than the idea you dreamt of .. there is just  immense joy and gratitude for all my colleagues and friends in the making of this historic effort !
WE ARE ONE and WE SHALL OVERCOME  ! Jai Hind ! https://t.co/WoquwkSyqT
— Amitabh Bachchan (@SrBachchan) April 6, 2020

We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: Netflix won’t have new series or movies for a while as Hollywood has shut down
The industry is reportedly staring at a loss of Rs 800-1000 crore due to the 21-day nationwide lockdown imposed to curb the spread of Covid-19. With production and shoots coming to a halt, actors and directors have no work. The worst-hit are the industry’s workers and daily wagers.
“The Indian film industry is one. We are one family. But there is a bigger family, which supports and works with us. And that is our workers and daily wage earners. Who are facing great difficulties during the lockdown. We all have together with the help of sponsors and TV channels raised a fund. And this fund will be distributed to our workers and daily wage earners,” Bachchan said at the end of the film. 
Lauding the film, Bollywood producer and director Karan Johar tweeted saying, “This is so amazing! So brilliantly and cleverly told! So rightfully said that we are one huge family! A family that creates and entertains! We stand by each other through thick and thin! Salute to Amitabh Bachchan and the entire team of actors and creators for making this!”
This is so amazing! So brilliantly and cleverly told! So rightfully said that we are one huge family! A family that creates and entertains! We stand by each other through thick and thin! Salute to @SrBachchan and the entire team of actors and creators for making this!❤️❤️❤️ https://t.co/XcNbunGQCs
— Karan Johar (@karanjohar) April 6, 2020

