Swamy’s question on Sitharaman’s ‘act of god’, Anurag Kashyap offers ‘proof’ to Times Now
New Delhi: Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman’s comment that the coronavirus pandemic is an ‘act of god’ and may result in contraction of the economy, at the 41st GST Council meeting Thursday drew strong reactions from social media users. Actor Rhea Chakraborty’s interview to India Today also kept the twitterati extremely busy.
Haseeb Drabu, former Jammu and Kashmir finance minister had this to say on Sitharaman’s comment.
Union Finance Ministry can’t be behaving like an insurance company by invoking “Act of God” argument to deny compensation to states. Remember Paresh Rawal film Oh My God! There are many ways to finance the compensation fund deficit provided centre covers its commitment deficit.
— Haseeb Drabu (@HaseebDrabu) August 27, 2020

BJP Rajya Sabha MP Subramanian Swamy has a question for Sitharaman about God.
I am reliably informed that FM N. Sitharaman told a meeting that COVID-19 is an act God!! I will post the video soon. Was the decline in annual growth rate in GDP from 8 % in FY 15 to (1st Qtr 2020) 3.1 % pre-C0VID, also an act of God ?
— Subramanian Swamy (@Swamy39) August 28, 2020

For herself, Sitharaman remained focussed on the sixth anniversary of Jan Dhan Yojana.
Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana has brought in financial inclusion in India in an unprecedented scale. It was on this day six years ago.
 #6YearsOfJanDhanYojana  https://t.co/EYmpGZPBIB
— Nirmala Sitharaman (@nsitharaman) August 28, 2020

Congress spokesperson Ragini Nayak schools News18 anchor Amish Devgan.
महोदय, ‘मेरे को’ नहीं ‘मुझे’ होता है,‘देने को’ नहीं ‘देने में’ होता है,‘पड़ लिया’ नहीं ‘पढ़ लिया’ होता है,‘में’ नहीं ‘मैं’ होता है,‘माफ़ करिए’ नहीं ‘माफ़ कीजिए’ होता है,अब आप माफ़ी मांग ही रहे हैं तो चलिए माफ़ किया…लेकिन पत्रकारिता से पहले आपको हिंदी सिखानी पड़ेगी 😂 https://t.co/S1vs3D210W
— Dr. Ragini Nayak (@NayakRagini) August 27, 2020

Journalist Pritish Nandy lauds Rhea Chakraborty’s composure even as she finds herself in the eye of a storm.
I don’t know Rhea Chakraborty but am impressed by how she is holding up against the brute might of all those eager to blame her for Sushant’s death. It’s not easy being a woman on a crime scene. It’s worse if you were the victim’s live-in partner. You are easy prey.
— Pritish Nandy (@PritishNandy) August 27, 2020

Activist Gurmehar Kaur is one person who can identify with Chakraborty’s plight.
Watching Rhea in those interviews, vulnerable and trying to put on a brave face reminded me same witch hunt, vilification, twisting of lies, being reduced to Prime Time news entertainment when I was 19. My heart goes out to Rhea Chakraborty and her family. This too shall pass.
— Gurmehar Kaur (@mehartweets) August 27, 2020

Filmmaker Ram Gopal Varma is upset with Republic TV’s Arnab Goswami, but happy with journalist Rajdeep Sardesai. Find out why.
Finally the other side of the witch hunt of Rhea  ..The tenet of Journalism is to be fair and i thought Arnab and various murdered it,but now I want  to thank India today and @sardesairajdeep for reviving it https://t.co/PPvBhnXj6b
— Ram Gopal Varma (@RGVzoomin) August 27, 2020

Filmmaker Anurag Kashyap offers to offer proof to Times Now’s Navika Kumar
I still have the copy of the chats if you want madam Navika Kumar .. how conveniently you don’t have the copy .. poor you .. https://t.co/aNRfSlmF75
— Anurag Kashyap (@anuragkashyap72) August 27, 2020

Former MP Shahid Siddiqui on life after detoxification from news.
Thanks God I stopped appearing & watching bloodthirsty Rwandan Channels two yrs back. I finished writing my 400 page Novel and now completing my Memoirs. Watching old& new films. Having wonderful morning walks. Life is much better without Toxic Media. pic.twitter.com/NLrm4Jqbsx
— shahid siddiqui (@shahid_siddiqui) August 28, 2020

Rajya Sabha MP Dr Akhilesh P Singh and Thiruvananthapuram MP Shashi Tharoor, signatories to the G 23 letter seem to have had a change of heart..
I’ve been silent for 4 days on recent events in @incIndia because once the CongressPresident says the issue is behind us, it is the duty of all of us to work together constructively in the interests of the Party. I urge all my colleagues to uphold this principle & end the debate.
— Shashi Tharoor (@ShashiTharoor) August 27, 2020

Although I signed a letter to CP, it was never my intent to discuss party matters publicly. With Sonia ji charting out a clear path for #Congress in the CWC, I have full confidence in her & Rahul ji. I urge my friends to have faith & not discuss these issues in public either.
— Dr Akhilesh Prasad Singh (@akhileshPdsingh) August 27, 2020

Meanwhile, Congress leader Manish Tewari sees signs of hope in the bloom of flowers.
Let a hundred flowers bloom  
Chandani Flowers at our Ropar Residence pic.twitter.com/lvsSgx8jY8
— Manish Tewari (@ManishTewari) August 28, 2020

AAP leader and Delhi Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia has words of caution on the NEET-JEE exams.
'Despite many protocols & provisions, Home minister also got infected…By calling 28 lakh children to exam centres trusting only in protocol, we are creating a huge threat.'
Hon'ble Dy CM @msisodia writes to HRD Minister on JEE- NEET exams.#Rise_AgainstExamsInCovid pic.twitter.com/D1mZF2U6kE
— AAP (@AamAadmiParty) August 27, 2020

India’s cricket captain Virat Kohli must have known what to expect from fans after he and Anushka Sharma announced they were expecting.
Virat: We are expecting 
RCB fans: Same, since 2008
— The Educated Moron (@EducatedMoron) August 27, 2020

Here’s actor Amitabh Bachchan giving a lesson on looking suave as he shoots for Kaun Banega Crorepati.
T 3640  – कुछ देवीयाँ आज shooting पे , मेरे चश्मे को देख कर बोलीं  .. 'COOL' .. !!maine man hi man socha , chalo bach gaye ; vatavaran anukool hai .. !!😁  मैंने मन ही मन सोचा , चलो बच गए  ; वातावरण  अनुकूल है  !!😁 pic.twitter.com/Z6Rw6DFr42
— Amitabh Bachchan (@SrBachchan) August 27, 2020

Activist Bernice King on racial discrimination in the US after the recent police shooting of black man Jacob Blake in Wisconsin.
True story. pic.twitter.com/DUay15www2
— Be A King (@BerniceKing) August 28, 2020

If looks could onoy speak, this “oops” moment between US First Lady Melania and First Daughter Ivanka Trump, says it all
This was so weird. #RNC2020 pic.twitter.com/YHReTl0bfT
— Dana Goldberg (@DGComedy) August 28, 2020
