India ranks 56th among 200 countries on Covid-19 safety assessment
New Delhi: India has been ranked 56th out of 200 countries in a comprehensive report on safety and risk assessment of nations tackling Covid-19.
According to the 250-page-long report, Switzerland is the safest country in the world for Covid-19, followed by Germany and Israel. South Sudan is the most dangerous.
Published on 4 June 2020, the study used 130 qualitative and quantitative parameters with over 11,400 data points to create an index analysing “health, societal and economic status of each region in terms of their absolute and relative stability, safety and risk”.
This risk analysis report was conducted by the Deep Knowledge Group, a consortium of commercial and non-profits owned by Deep Knowledge Ventures. It is an investment firm in Hong Kong and was founded in 2014.
The study has been aimed at enabling governments to learn from the strengths and weaknesses of other countries in order to “derive action-based answers” when it came to coping with the coronavirus pandemic.
Also read: Schools unlikely to open until late August, govt hopes situation ‘will be favourable’ by then
The study also created a subset of four distinct tiers, ranking each nation under different parameters according to available data.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Tier one included 20 countries which were analysed by 130 parameters. Each country in tier one scored “exceptionally well” in terms of regional safety. Some of the nations in tier one are Switzerland, Germany, Israel, Japan and Singapore.
Tier two also included 20 countries which were studied by 60 parameters. In this tier, the countries scored on the “higher end of average” for the quality of their health care systems, emergency preparedness and government management.
Tier three included 60 countries which “should have scored well” given their crisis management resources and healthcare infrastructure, but these nations “ranked much lower than expected”. India was included in tier three, along with Pakistan, Brazil and some others.
Tier four saw 100 countries which scored “least optimally” and saw the highest levels of “data unavailability and unreliability”.
Also read: Covid test positivity rates, rising deaths indicate that India isn’t seeing the full picture
 
