Covid affects 9 out of 10 people with eating disorders, finds UK study. This is how
New Delhi: Nine out of 10 people (87 per cent) who dealt with or are dealing with eating disorders have more acutely felt the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic, with over 30 per cent saying their symptoms got “much worse”, found a study by the Northumbria University in Newcastle, UK.
The study conducted by Northumbria’s Department of Psychology was published in the online edition of Journal of Eating Disorders Sunday.
Researchers surveyed individuals from across the UK who were either experiencing or in recovery from an eating disorder, during the early stages of the pandemic. They found that disruptions in daily life due to the lockdown and social distancing measures had a detrimental impact on an individual’s well being.
“Findings indicate detrimental impacts on psychological well-being, including decreased feelings of control, increased feelings of social isolation, increased rumination about disordered eating, and low feelings of social support,” the study noted.
The American Psychiatric Association (APA) defines eating disorders as illnesses where people experience severe disturbances in eating behaviours, its related thoughts and emotions. “People with eating disorders typically become pre-occupied with food and their body weight,” APA said.
It also noted that eating disorders were coupled with order psychiatric issues such as anxiety, panic, obsessive compulsive disorder, alcohol and drug abuse problems.
Some eating disorders are anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and binge eating.
Also read: 62% Indians want foreign firms to set up units, 43% want them to buy Indian firms — Pew study
Dr Kamna Chhiber, a clinical psychologist and head of Mental Health at the Department of Mental Health and Behavioral Sciences in New Delhi’s Fortis Healthcare, said eating disorders were mental health-related illnesses.
“Eating disorders are mental health illnesses which not only are challenging to the person but also their social support system, especially while trying to re-orient themselves,” she told ThePrint.
Chhiber explained how the pandemic and lockdown conditions has lead to additional stress on those already suffering from pre-existing illnesses. In a scenario where people feel loss of control over a situation, they may try to take charge by restricting their intake of food or binge eating, she added.
Beat, a UK-based eating disorder charity, has reported a 81 per cent increase in its helpline channels. This included a 125 per cent rise in social media contact and a 115 per cent surge in online group attendance.
A 2012 survey conducted among 66 psychiatrists in Bengaluru, called Are eating disorders a significant clinical issue in urban India?, had found that two-thirds of the physicians reported seeing at least one patient with an eating disorder.
In another study conducted in 2014, it was revealed that 26.67 per cent adolescent girls in India had disturbed eating attitudes and behaviours.
For Chhiber, the way forward was to talk about mental health in a more serious manner. “The problem is that in India mental health is not prominently spoken about and it doesn’t stay in the limelight long enough.”
She said it was important to see eating disorders as mental health issues.
“There needs to be greater discourse on all kinds of mental health illnesses and mental health-related illnesses, especially eating disorders. Many myths need to be busted regarding eating disorders. And people need to step forward and seek treatment and feel no hesitation as there is treatment and experts available,” she said.
Also read: 80% Covid patients in India are asymptomatic, health ministry analysis finds
