Release of NEET admit cards delayed, but no decision yet on rescheduling exam
New Delhi: The National Testing Agency (NTA) has delayed releasing the admit cards for National Eligibility and Entrance Test (NEET), which is meant for admission to medical colleges, in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic.
The agency was supposed to release the admit cards on 27 March, which has now been delayed until 14 April, when the 21-day nationwide lockdown ends, and beyond, ThePrint has learnt.
The NTA is responsible for conducting various entrance exams such as the NEET and the Joint Entrance Exam (JEE).
There is, however, no decision yet on whether the date of the exam, scheduled to take place on 3 May, will be changed or not.
“We are not releasing the admit cards tomorrow (Friday). However, there is no decision yet on rescheduling the exam. We are in touch with all the agencies and will take a final call after coordinating with everyone,” an official in the NTA told ThePrint. 
He added the agency will issue an official circular in this regard Friday. 
Also read: Centre orders CBSE, educational institutions to postpone exams till 31 March over coronavirus
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Over 15 lakh students have registered for NEET this year, the results of which are scheduled to be announced in June. 
The Ministry of Human Resource Development had on 24 March written to all states and autonomous bodies like the NTA to work on rescheduling of exams dates. 
The Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) along with the NTA will work on a revised schedule for board exams and entrance exams. The JEE has already been postponed by the NTA. 
The lockdown has forced the government to look at an alternate academic calendar. 
Autonomous bodies like the National Council for Educational Research and Training (NCERT), University Grants Commission (UGC) and All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) have also been asked to work on an alternate academic calendar.
Also read: Modi govt wants CBSE, NCERT, colleges to revise academic calendar due to Covid-19 lockdown
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Plzz consider the stress about these on going lockdown problems .on behalf of this postone the exam date of UGC NEET
Fake newspaper
I have checked the official website of  NTA.They have said that neet is postponded till the end of may but date is yet to be announced.you may also check ntaneet.nic.in
please wait corona virus is there, India is 🔐
Hey it’s already announced that neet will not be held on 3rd may.
Rule is rule neet ka exam 3 may ko hi hona chahiye
Really Neet exam Hona chahie
Friend avi mastii se padho,exam hoga hi…thora late ho pr jarur hoga …stay home and best preparation of neet
NDTV flashed news of NEET exam postponed. Is that not correct?
Sabhi ko paas kare
Inter view se counciling ho
Neet hoga kyA nhi yrr Pgl ho rahi haii hamloga…. …
Pata nahi
Hoga surely.Havefaith in system
Plzzz provide tentative. Date of neet
There are no official notification about neet admit card.
What the exam date is going to change
