Chidambaram, Tharoor lead Congress support for PM’s COVID-19 speech, but with a caveat
New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s address to the nation Thursday night on COVID-19 got the backing of a host of senior Congress leaders even though Rahul Gandhi has maintained silence. 
The former Congress president was critical of the government earlier, saying India would pay a heavy price because of the government’s inability to act decisively.
Gandhi’s silence over Modi’s address indicated no change in his assessment of the government’s action. His party came out in support of the PM, nonetheless. 
The Prime Minister had called for a ‘Janata Curfew’ on Sunday and also appealed to the people to show solidarity with the health workers and others who were putting service to the nation ahead of their own safety. 
Congress MP Shashi Tharoor tweeted that he welcomed “Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s call to solidarity” even as he added “Sunday is the easiest day” to try the Janata Curfew. 
I welcome @PMOIndia @narendramodi ‘s call to solidarity at this challenging time. Will support #JanataCurfew while conscious that Sunday is the easiest day to try it. Need more reinforcement of social distancing (incl suspending Parliament) & specific economic relief measures
— Shashi Tharoor (@ShashiTharoor) March 19, 2020

Former finance minister P. Chidambaram voiced his support in a similar vein in a series of tweets, stressing the need to impose tougher measures in the coming weeks. 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
I am duty bound to support the PM. In effect, the PM has asked the people to wage the war against COVID with moral armaments. We shall do so on Sunday and in the following days.
— P. Chidambaram (@PChidambaram_IN) March 19, 2020

I have offered our support to the PM’s announcements yesterday, but I am absolutely certain that the PM will have no option but to come back with tougher social and economic measures.
— P. Chidambaram (@PChidambaram_IN) March 20, 2020

After reviewing overnight developments in India and the world, I am convinced that a temporary lockdown of towns and cities for 2-4 weeks is necessary.
— P. Chidambaram (@PChidambaram_IN) March 20, 2020

Yesterday, I got the impression that PM was testing the waters. He should act boldly. The war against coronavirus cannot be fought with moral armaments.
— P. Chidambaram (@PChidambaram_IN) March 20, 2020

Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot said his government was with the Prime Minister in the fight against coronavirus.
Our government is with the PM to fight and defeat Corona virus. We have taken all stakeholders along to fight this virus including opposition parties,Medical experts,religious leaders and I am meeting ppl of social sector tomorrow. I am personally monitoring this whole initiative
— Ashok Gehlot (@ashokgehlot51) March 19, 2020

Addressing the media at the Congress headquarters in New Delhi following the PM’s address, party spokesperson Ajay Maken said, “The Congress and its workers will stand by the government in all their endeavours to fight COVID-19.” 
He said the Congress and its leaders would help spread awareness regarding preventive measures and extend help with any emergency services.
Maken also urged the government to pay special attention to slum clusters where the high population density left little scope for social distancing, which is being cited as a key preventive measure.
Congress national spokesperson Pawan Khera told ThePrint that it was “only natural for all of us to come together during such a time”. 
“While we will have political and ideological differences with the government in power, we owe this to the country we love and be collectively responsible,” Khera said, adding that Rahul had been proactively taking up the issue of employing “coercive measures” to fight the situation at hand. 
Also Read: PM address: ‘Janata curfew & Thank You’ in Express, ‘one hand on thaali’ says Telegraph  
In a tweet earlier, on Wednesday, Gandhi had called for “quick aggressive action” to tackle the coronavirus pandemic. 
Quick aggressive action is the answer to tackling the #Coronavirus . India is going to pay an extremely heavy price for our governments inability to act decisively.
— Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) March 18, 2020

On 12 February, Rahul had shared a Harvard Gazette article on his Twitter page and said the government was not taking the threat posed by coronavirus to people and India’s economy seriously.
He re-shared the tweet on 13 March, reiterating his point and stating that “the Indian economy will be destroyed if strong action is not taken”. 
I will keep repeating this. 
The #coronavirus is a huge problem. Ignoring the problem is a non solution. The Indian economy will be destroyed if strong action is not taken. The government is in a stupor. https://t.co/SuEvqMFbQd
— Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) March 13, 2020

Dear @PMOIndia,
Quit wasting India's time playing the clown with your social media accounts, when India is facing an emergency. Focus the attention of every Indian on taking on the Corona virus challenge. 
Here's how it's done..#coronavirusindia pic.twitter.com/jLZG5ISjwt
— Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) March 3, 2020

Some other members of the Congress have been as unsparing, taking a stern stance on the PM’s speech. 
Rajya Sabha MP and former Union minister Anand Sharma said “Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi… must walk the talk, and not pontificate”.
The govt has evoked the Epidemic Act & asked citizens above 65 to stay indoors. Urge the PM to respect & not violate the law by insisting the farcical Parliament session to continue. He himself, his Ministers and other leaders above 65 years would be violators of the law.
— Anand Sharma (@AnandSharmaINC) March 19, 2020

The corona virus pandemic is posing a grave threat globally, to the health of the citizens and the economies of countries. The country and world is united in wake of this pandemic. Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi, however, must walk the talk, and not pontificate.
— Anand Sharma (@AnandSharmaINC) March 19, 2020

Spokesperson and MP Manish Tewari said the PM’s address underscored not just the government’s seriousness but also its “helplessness”.
–@narendramodi ‘s address underscores both seriousness and in a sense helplessness of the Govt. It is perfectly understandable given the evolving situation sans a vaccine. Reassurance with regard to Health Infrastructure in addition to preventive measures would have been helpful.
— Manish Tewari (@ManishTewari) March 19, 2020

Also Read: Janata curfew: Brilliant nudge or Modi should’ve assured more about India’s preparedness?
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
