Use parcel trains to transport medical equipment to remote districts, Railways tells states
New Delhi: At a time when several states are facing shortage of medical equipment, the Indian Railways has pitched in to supply those essentials through its special parcel trains, ThePrint has learnt.
According to railway officials, Railway Board Chiarman Vinod Kumar Yadav has asked all state chief secretaries, in a note sent Wednesday, to make use of the parcel train service to transport medical essentials such as masks, ventilators and personal protective equipment to remote districts.
The railways has been running freight trains to transport essential commodities. But for smaller quantities of goods such as medical equipment, states have been urged to avail of the parcel train service for their quick movement, the officials added.
The state governments have also been asked to relax curfew restrictions where Section 144 (unlawful assembly) has been imposed, and provide security to the parcel trains at stations to ensure there is no looting etc. at the time of unloading of goods, Railway officials said.
Also read: Will the armchair coronavirus experts please sit down
The movement of parcel trains is typically from point to point, and at a time, at least, five parcel bogies for the same destination can be loaded in a train.
“Since it is a point to point service, these trains can be used to ensure that the necessary equipment is promptly sent to the districts in need,” a senior railway official said.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Several states have raised the issue of shortage of medical equipment.
A nationwide government survey, conducted to assess the preparedness at the district level to tackle the coronavirus pandemic, also showed that there is a shortage of medical staff, equipment and facilities such as ICU beds, ventilators, ambulances and oxygen cylinders. The survey was conducted at the behest of the Prime Minister’s Office.
“PPEs (personal protective equipment) such as masks, gloves etc. for medical staff was an area of concern for several districts and across states,” according to the ‘National Preparedness Survey on COVID 19’.
The survey, conducted online between 25 and 30 March, was released Thursday.
