Education minister skips NEET-JEE in think-tank speech, bats for govt’s ‘mother tongue’ push
New Delhi: Union Education Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal ‘Nishank’ skipped any mention of the ongoing NEET-JEE furore as he addressed a webinar organised by a Delhi-based think-tank Friday. 
The webinar, held by think-tank Bharat Niti, focused on the subject ‘Edutech — Changing Landscape of Learning Process’. 
Pokhriyal’s speech at the event dealt with the importance of learning the mother tongue, with the minister defending the government’s focus on regional languages in the National Education Policy (NEP) cleared by the Union Cabinet last month. 
A provision in the NEP that advises mother tongue as medium of instruction until Class 5 has triggered much controversy.
Pokhriyal cited Japan, Germany and Israel as examples to underline his argument that learning in one’s mother tongue doesn’t come in the way of development.  
“The way a child can express and understand herself in her own language, it will not be possible in any other language. We have a vision behind this approach,” he said. “Even UNESCO has said that primary education, as much as possible, should be in the mother tongue,” Pokhriyal added.
“Some people had expressed some concerns over the issue a few days ago, saying that if you want to progress in the world English is important. But we have not opposed any language,” he said.
 “At the same time we are not forcing any language on anyone. You should also allow students to be free and don’t stop them… let them decide. Two, three or four, whatever language they want to learn, let them,” he added. 
“There are 22 languages listed in the Eighth Schedule in India and we should learn them.  They are our strength. We want the development of all these 22 languages and aren’t forcing any language on anyone.” 
The minister said at least 20 developed countries in the world teach in their mother tongue. 
The entire world, he added, is looking towards India, and “India’s cultural heritage is our strength”. “Our new education policy links the past with the present, the Vedic knowledge with modern science,” he said.
Weighing in on the continued shutdown of schools in light of the Covid-19 lockdown, Pokhriyal said the Modi government is committed to ensuring access to lessons for all students. 
“We are the world’s first country that is providing online education to 25 crore students together. Our target is to reach each and every student and wherever there is no internet connectivity and smartphones we will reach through television sets by our Swayam Prabha channel,” he added. 
Also Read: If JEE is delayed, we’ll have to squeeze syllabus into less than 6 months, says IIT Delhi director
The minister’s address at the event came amid deep concerns among students about the government’s decision to hold the Joint Entrance Exam (JEE) Main and the National Eligibility and Entrance Test (NEET) in the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic. 
The education ministry has so far been steadfast in its defence of the decision, with Pokhriyal saying on earlier occasions that going ahead with the exams is what the majority of aspirants want. However, many students continue to demand a postponement.
The comment section of the Bharat Niti webinar was flooded with student requests for a postponement of the NEET and JEE, two crucial exams that oversee medical and engineering admissions in India.
