Not apologetic about comments, migrant workers putting lives at risk: ex-BJP MP Balbir Punj
New Delhi: Former BJP MP Balbir Punj kicked up a storm after he called migrant workers, undertaking the journey back home on foot, “irresponsible” on social media Friday.
Thousands of migrant and daily wage workers have been trying to return to their villages on foot after the Modi government announced an unprecedented nationwide lockdown for 21 days Tuesday. All public transport, including train services, have been suspended for this period.
In a series of tweets, Punj suggested that many were heading back to “utilise their forced ‘chutti’  to catch up with their families or errands back home”, even though multiple reports suggest that with no money or food they had little choice but to leave for home.
Why migrants leaving Delhi ? For want of money or food ? NO. Just irresponsible. There is no money/ jobs waiting for them back home. It’s to utilise their forced ‘chutti’ to catch up with their families or errands back home. Gravity of situation hasn’t dawned on them.@Si_lv_er
— Balbir Punj (@balbirpunj) March 27, 2020

In another tweet, he said, “What’s the mindset that’s motivating thousands to flee Delhi at great risk to themselves & others? Same which tells them to drive without helmets, seat belts , on the wrong side or after drinking. Philosophy: Take shortcuts, ignore risks. Plain irresponsible behaviour”.
When asked to comment on his tweets, the former BJP MP and journalist said that everyone was entitled to their views and that he was not apologetic about his tweets.
“They are not only putting themselves at risk but others too. Walking on foot for so long won’t take them anywhere. So many people being on the road at the same time only increases the risk of coronavirus. They need to understand that,” Punj told ThePrint.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: Centre committed all support to migrant workers during lockdown: Home Minister Amit Shah
Many condemned Punj’s comments, calling them anti-poor.
Tarun Vijay, chairman of Uttarakhand war memorial and former editor of RSS weekly Panchajanya also criticised Punj. “No no no. In times of pain and suffering they feel for their near and dear ones”, he said. Vijay added that everyone wants to rush back to their families in times of fear.
No no no. In times of pain and suffering they feel for their near and dear ones. None went to them to explain and provide shelter, food. The first name in times of fear and Dukh comes on our lips is name of mother,sister,kids.This pull makes them come on roads to rush back Home.
— Tarun Vijay தருண் விஜய் (@Tarunvijay) March 28, 2020

Many Congress leaders also criticised Punj’s remarks. Former MP Kirti Azad lashed out at Punj and said that unlike the latter, the migrants did not have “easy access” to luxuries.
Shame on u. r they walking 1000 kms w/o water food for chutti? Why, just because u r comfortable at home and have easy access to luxuries & basic needs. Its the same for them. I hope u paying ur migrant domestic help & not abandoned them?#GOI must help @PMOIndia #COVIDIOTS
— Kirti Azad (@KirtiAzaad) March 28, 2020

Former Rajya Sabha MP Shahid Siddiqui called out Punj’s “insensitivity and arrogance”.
I know Balbir but never thought he is so dumb, insensitive and heartless. I think it’s arrogance of power which makes a person so insensitive & dumb. https://t.co/vIa0wom3Zs
— shahid siddiqui (@shahid_siddiqui) March 28, 2020

There were many others who were also critical of what they termed as the double standards of the government in rescuing the NRIs through special flights and not doing anything for the poor.
Journalist Ashutosh tweeted that while the government sent special flights to rescue Indians trapped abroad, they are being highly irresponsible towards the poor in the country. “This reveals their ideology,” he added.
बलबीर पुंज बीजेपी/संघ के सदस्य हैं।सरकार विदेशों में फँसे भारतीयों को लाने के लिये विशेष विमान भेजती है। देश के ग़रीबों को ये ग़ैरज़िम्मेदार बताते हैं। बीजेपी सरकारें इन ग़रीबों के लिये विशेष विमान क्यों नहीं भेजती! ये विचारधारा की मानसिकता है। @balbirpunj @ajitanjum @INCIndia https://t.co/OKQakMCpSm
— ashutosh (@ashutosh83B) March 28, 2020

While Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi didn’t react to the comment directly, she posted pictures of the relief work being done by the party workers to assist the migrant labourers.
अनिश्चितता, भय, भूख और पीड़ा के इस माहौल में हजारों हिंदुस्तानियों के कदम अपने गाँवों की ओर निकल पड़े हैं। मुझे गर्व है उप्र कांग्रेस के @VirendraGudduIN टुक्कीमल खटिक, मिथुन त्यागी, मुकेश धनगर @SChaudharyINC और उन सभी साथियों पर जो संकट की इस घड़ी में लोगों की मदद कर रहे हैं। pic.twitter.com/zxKLbGd4E0
— Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) March 28, 2020

However, there were many who agreed with Punj as his tweet received more than 2,000 likes.
Responding to the criticism, Punj tweeted, “I may be accused of being anti poor. Fact is migrant labour hs behaved irresponsibly.PM asked all to stay put where ever they were.With nothing to do in Delhi they thought of catching up with their families or errands back home .They didn’t realise gravity of situation. Sad.”
Also read: Stranded & with no jobs due to Covid-19 lockdown, labourers head home on foot, govt buses
This is not the first time Punj has found himself in the middle of a controversy. In 2012, his comments favouring then-chief minister of Gujarat Narendra Modi created a stir and led to BJP ally Janata Dal (United) attacking the party over his comments.
Punj had said that Modi was a “cent per cent prime ministerial material” and had even indicated that the latter was not communal as had been perceived. Sharad Yadav, who was the JD(U) chief then, had criticised the BJP for Punj’s remarks.
Punj was elected to the Rajya Sabha in 2000 and was re-elected in 2006. He also served as the BJP’s Gujarat in-charge in 2012 and is considered to be close to the RSS.
In 2013, he was promoted as one of the national vice-presidents of the BJP but was dropped in 2014 when Amit Shah formed his own team as the party president.
Born in Lalowal, Gurdaspur in Punjab, Punj started his career in journalism with the publication Motherland in 1971 and worked for The Financial Express from 1974 to 1996.
Punj has also served as the chairman of the National Commission for Youth from 2002-2004 and was a member of the Committee on External Affairs in August 2012.
Also read: ‘Better to die with families’ — no food or money, Delhi migrants prefer the long walk home
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Sir , Punj it not like as “नोट बंदी ” . In lock down all diversified authorities had to give bread & butter earners  to – time ,shelter , food , Govt.  package etc. before announcement then we were felt better quarantine status than happing . We should have done best picking Corona ‘s patients who came in India
A heart less idiot .if he know the sufferings of starvation he might not have commented like this.This type of people will ensue the defeat of BJP.
Punj is right and I fully support his statement. At this  time the workers are not going to get a better enviorment at their native homem
Can all these bleeding hearts who criticize Balbir Punj deny that the migrant workers trekking back are posing great risk to themselves, their fellow travellers and their home towns? Do the poor have higher right to act irresponsibly. Delhi government has promised them place to stay and food. Why should these people ignore such offer?
If promises were horses, beggars would ride. If all the  promises of the politicians were implemented, then Mera  Bharat would be Ram Rajya.
Mr. Balpur bunk is staying with his family nd may be God blessed with good weath. We are happy butWhat about the daily wagers working  faraway fr their home towns .how they feel about their families safety in their home towns.Atleast the govt should provide free buses as one time measure to reach their destination This is the humble request to our honourable P.M in this  time. Family seperation is worst than corona infection.  It is a  similar problem now we are facing in all states. God pls save our people ,our country nd the entire world from this critical times….
Surely some people are living in Ivory Tower. Punj saheb, please recall the plight of the exodus of people post India-Pak Independance. None had the slightest inkling whether they would reach their destination but it was the spirit of never say die that kept them going. Let us recall our history and take cue from it. Can  we be little considerate for those who are not well off ?
I wonder why migrant labour is leaving Delhi only walking all the way? There are equal number or more labour in  Bengaluru, Chennai, Kerala, J&K. Why such a commotion has not happened at those places? Why only at Delhi?
What about senior citizens who are sick n vulnerable who are stranded at various places they should be allowed to get back to their homes. They may be permitted as special cases otherwise it increase risk of infection.
Senior citizen with history of critical ailments stranded  may be permitted to travel to home town.
Dear Balbir Sir, just one question for you to get to the situation they are in.
Question.)
Have you ever been in your life to an NGO for getting food for the family and yourself in a long queue line ?
If yes, then please think of that flashback and you’ll get the answer why they are on foot without food to be with their root.
If no, then you’re not eligible to comment over anything or utter a single letter against them. Cuz to feel for them you need to be like them first. Everyone in our country isn’t born with a golden spoon population of less than 10%
Educated but not civilized. Parents might be feeling shame on their beloved son’s tweets
This central Gov just don’t take any blame after doing blunders. The world saw how community spread started in Italy and Iran at the start of March. Everyone saw it coming. They had 20 days to take a decision on lockdown before community spread started in India. Did the gov not know how many percent of Indian’s work on daily wages and. What planning the Central gov did for daily wagers ? No planning. Same situation was created while notebandi. Back then poor people were in lines for ATM now they are in the line for buses.
The right question to ask is “What planning the Kejriwal gov did for poor workers as he is the CM of Delhi.?” But AAPPees can never take responsibilities  as they have always been activists and would remain like that.  They always look towards the central government for doing job they are supposed to do. Why not good for nothing CM Kejriwal resign immediately? More Kejriwal remains the CM of Delhi morethe  Delhiites would feel  betrayed.
As usual, journalist Mr. Ashutosh makes no sense at all.
One has to agree with Mr. Punj on this issue. What is it that the migrant workers are going home for? Jobs await them there? Money awaits them there? They will be just as much penniless and jobless back in the village. So why go to the village? What purpose does it serve?
On each news channel, doctors are explaining 24*7 how the virus spreads from one person to another. Till now, thankfully, it is limited to the cities. Our cities have much better health infrastructure and highly skilled medical personnel to take care of the sick.
These migrant labourers are sure to carry the disease with them to remote villages of UP and Bihar which may not even have a hospital. What, till now, has been an urban disease will rapidly spread to the rural areas because of this mass migration.
The migrant labourers are just an irresponsible bunch. Instead of condemning Mr. Punj for being “heartless” people must see the rationale of his opinions and arguments. The last thing we need now is political mudslinging over this issue. A logical and rational approach is the need of the hour to deal with the crisis.
The same reason wealthy NRIs flew back to India in Boeing 787s using taxpayer’s money.
