ICMR to review ‘wonder’ drug combo used to treat Covid patients in Bangladesh
New Delhi: The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the country’s apex medical research body, is reviewing the benefits of drugs ivermectin and doxycycline as potential therapy for Covid-19. The combination of these two drugs has been hailed by doctors in Bangladesh for yielding “astounding results”.
“We are closely studying the drug ivermectin and its possible efficacy against Covid19. It needs to be studied more closely,” Nivedita Gupta, senior scientist at ICMR, told ThePrint.
Ivermectin is a US Food and Drug Administration-approved anti-parasite drug used to treat some parasitic worms, while doxycycline is an antibiotic.
On 19 May, a team of doctors from Bangladesh claimed that their research on the combination of these two drugs “yielded astounding results” in curing patients with acute symptoms of Covid-19.
“Out of 60 COVID-19 patients, all recovered as the combination of the two drugs were applied”, Professor Dr Md Tarek Alam, the head of medicine department at the Bangladesh Medical College Hospital (BMCH) told news agency PTI.
Meanwhile, according to Gupta, ICMR has reviewed the drug multiple times.
“In in-vitro studies it has shown effectiveness but there are no studies on human beings,” she said.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“We are continuously studying the evolution of the use of this drug in the treatment protocol of Covid19 patients. However, we need solid evidence or a published study, backed by statistically significant data on a bigger sample size to conclude anything,” she added.
Also read: Why researchers are questioning Lancet study that linked HCQ to higher Covid death risk
The Bangladeshi doctors claimed that the efficacy of the ivermectin-doxycycline drug combination is quite high and it has helped in the recovery of patients afflicted with Covid-19 within four days. They also claimed that “there were no side effects” of this treatment.
“The repeated or second tests, in line with the procedure, reconfirmed them COVID-19 negative in all the cases under the research which found the combination to have no side effects on patients either,” Dr Alam was quoted as saying.
“We are hundred per cent hopeful about the effectiveness of the combination,” he added.
According to government portal Clinical Trials Registry India (CTRI), ivermectin is part of at least five ongoing trials in the country.
Max Hospital has registered a trial to study the effectiveness of ivermectin with ‘standard of care treatment versus standard of care treatment for Covid-19 cases’.
Another trial, registered by the Department of Medicine of Lady Hardinge Medical College in Delhi, will study the effects of anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine, ciclesonide, a drug used to treat asthma, and ivermectin in the treatment of moderate Covid-19 illness.
The trial is divided into four parts — three for each medicine and one for standard care. “A sample size of 30 in each arm is proposed to be included over a period of 6 months. Trial drugs would be withdrawn if they deteriorate to severe Covid-19 illness,” noted the details of the trial.
Also read: Behind Telangana’s rising Covid numbers, low testing and violations of ICMR, HC orders
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Ivermectin is effective in covid 19 is proven without side effects . Also most economical way of treatment why not try as a prophylactic drug for all flu related patients    & worries staff.  New antivirals still not prove & treatment costs not affordable  to poor countries like India in
Think it is very telling that absolutely no news media in the USA has mentioned this.  Our family has used ivermectin to treat horses, ourselves and dogs for years. Because it is safe and has treated other diseases around the world in children it seems like a tried, true and intelligent way to save lives.
Dear Editor,
I have great respect for The print and I hope tbis story is followed up on a daily basis,with updates shared. Else India will be shoved down with expensive and useless drug such as Remidisvir.
IVERMECTIN
Times Of India published two reports on 21st and 22th May praising Rendesivir and Favipiravir, two antivirals. Mainstream media worldwide are promoting these drugs of big pharma companies; however, most, if not all, antivirals are of questionable efficacy. No one is promoting IVERMECTIN, a cheap oral drug, prescribing which against COVID19 doctors from many nations, including Bangladesh, got EXCELLENT results. No one is interested in promoting this off patented molecule. 
Scientists could not fabricate vaccines against all and every pathogenic Virus; most probably, COVID19 is one of such type. Monoclonal antibody against viral proteins, however, is a good treatment plan for serious indoor patients.
NO MASK, NO SOCIAL DISTANCING, NO QUARANTINE, NO LOCKDOWN, WILL BE ABLE TO SAVE HUMANITY FROM COVID19. IVERMECTIN, HCQS, AND HERD IMMUNITY DUE TO SUBCLINICAL INFECTION  IN COMMUNITY AT LARGE WOULD SAVE US.
Many oft used  drugs, like HCQS, prolong Q-T interval; prolongation of Q-T in ECG tracing occasionally leads to life threatening arrhythmias. Regulatory bodies, those instruct clinicians regarding what to do and what not to do, discouraged use of HCQS against COVID19 on this ground. If the patient is free from pre-existing cardiac ailments, there is no chance of fatal arrhythmias in COVID19 patients on HCQS. 
Objection against use of IVERMECTIN for treating COVID19 is that – there is only in vitro reports for it. In fact, since first week of April 2020, many reports have come up showing excellent results in treating COVID19 parents with IVERMECTIN. IVERMECTIN has immense curative and preventive role against COVID19.
Fight against COVID19
To fight against COVID19 India has to chalk out her own plan; we should not ape other nations. There would be serious socio-economic disaster in India if we continue total or partial lockdown. Most of the COVID19 infected patients in India are asymptomatic; and this might be due to presence of Curcumin in our daily food. So, it is very difficult to determine patient- load in India; we can not test for COVID19 in all persons under the Sun. 
Asymptomatic persons would refuse testing and any form of treatment – they would roam freely in society; and would infect the population at large; and this will in near future usher in HERD IMMUNITY in India. Most of the symptomatic patients present with mild to moderate illness; we should treat them as OPD patients. We have to treat these patients with mild-to-moderate Flu-like symptoms as quickly as possible; so that, they do not become severely ill to overwhelm the scarce indoor facilities in our country. Here is a safe outdoor treatment plan that will show quick and effective response in symptomatic patients (for adults): – Vitamin D & C and Zinc daily in usual recommend doses + Virostatic drug Ivermectin 12mg daily for 3 to 5 days + Senolytic antibiotic Azithromycin 250mg to 500mg daily for 5 days to 10 days. This treatment plan ushers in prompt response. Serious indoor patients would get these medicines + necessary supportive measures + Hydroxychloroquine Sulphate (HCQS).      –  Arun Kumar Laha 29, Abinash Banerjee Lane. Howrah 711104. (laha.a53@gmail.com) 
Disclaimer: –
This is not a prescription for general public to self- medicate themselves. It is for medical fraternity to think about my humble suggestion. 
To solve the problems of COVID 19, lockdown is not the only way out; we have to rely on development of HERD IMMUNITY by exposing people to low grade infection with COVID19 and we have to treat the symptomatic patients as fast as possible, to cut short the number of serious patients requiring indoor treatment. 
Many health- care personnel and other fighters against COVID19 are losing their lives to save the humanity at large; ICMR should think about prescribing IVERMECTIN (12mg in empty stomach once in a week instead of Hydroxychloroquine) to these persons as preventive measure. Ivermectin is safer than Hydroxychloroquine.
AS PER INDIAN TRIALS HOW MUCH IVERMECTIC IS USEFUL FOR COVID 19 PATIENTS,WHETHER THIS DRUG IS BENEFICIAL
NIRMAL
I spoke to one of my friend in South America. He also confirmed that they have been asked to take Ivermectin drops post they find the symptoms of Corona .People have recovered and many hospitals and Drs are also advising the same there. I think it needs to be studied in India also .
Home remedies for respiratory disease is Haldi ka doodh.
This should be tried.
Why don’t ICMR take fast decisions in this matter.
Ivermectine is a magical medicine but Indian government doesn’t want to try it very soon.
How foolish this is!
Please share more and more update about that medicine .
You are right.
ICMR should try this medicine.
It’s time to take fast decisions.
I don’t know what is strategy of icmr and Indian government.
You are right.
ICMR should try this medicine.
It’s time to take fast decisions.
I don’t know what is strategy of icmr and Indian government.
