Railways ready with plan to convert coaches into isolation wards, ICUs for Covid-19 patients
New Delhi: A day after Prime Minister Narendra Modi instructed the Indian Railways to convert train coaches into isolation wards and ICUs to ensure healthcare access in remote areas in light of the Covid-19 pandemic, the layout and design for the required modifications has been prepared.
The railways’ orders, accessed by ThePrint, state that a slew of modifications would be needed to convert rail coaches into isolation or ICU wards.
Some of the modifications that will be needed to turn the coaches into wards include removing the side partition next to the main door on each end, converting one Indian toilet on each side into a bathing room, removing middle berths, etc.
The way to convert toilets into bathing rooms would be “by placing wooden batten structure on the entire floor, which also covers the squatting pan”.
“A hand shower is to be provided and it is to be equipped with bucket, mug and soap dish also,” the orders state.
Among other modifications will be removing all ladders for climbing up to the middle and upper berths, using extra bottle holders for holding medical equipment, making functional all-charging points for laptops and mobiles, providing 230 V sockets in each cabin, and providing plastic curtains in each cabin to ensure isolation.
A senior official who did not wish to be named said that the orders will be notified by the Ministry of Railways Saturday.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: How states are delivering mid-day meals to students during Covid-19 school closure
ThePrint had reported Wednesday that PM Modi gave a go-ahead to the idea of turning coaches into isolation wards for Covid-19 patients since all towns have rail access. Trains with makeshift isolation wards will help serve areas that experience an outbreak but lack the requisite facilities.
The plan was considered feasible because rail coaches have been sitting idle since passenger train movement across the country stand cancelled until 14 April, even though freight operations continue for the transport of essential commodities.
Following the PM’s instructions, Railways Minister Piyush Goyal and Railway Board Chairman Vinod Kumar Wednesday instructed top officials to start preparations.
Also read: Covid-19 casts shadow on 60-year-old India-Pakistan tradition that survived Uri, Pulwama
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
We are support our Prime Minister.
Our gvt protect  the nation.
Thank you sir
I had discussed about converting the railway coaches mainly the AC coaches into medical ward to keep the infected persons with my wife atleast a week ago, believe me. But I was worried about its sanitation. But, a BIG THANKS n SALUTE to our Loving n Caring Prime Minister Mr. Narendra Modi Ji for taking such initiatives.Dear Modi Sir , you are really God, you heard my thoughts planning. In this crucial period you are like God to us.  I hope it was impossible to build wards for the patients .
Thanks Sir, All Indian are with you. 😊
The virus presumably is active in faeces for a few hours. How are you planning on maintaining sanitation?
It is a measurable idea to implement by our honorable PM. Without delaying much and by not making too much physical changes if berths are used as beds and upper n lower berths can be used. Middle berth in sleepers can be used to keep necessary things required. AC coaches not much changes, minimum. One toilet can be made to bathroom. One coach for doctors, nurses to be modified as per their requirement and for storing medical equipments, medicines etc.  All coaches to be cleaned and sanitized. Water should be stored. Train can be at the station of the respective place/ village. So that poor people/ villagers get the medical facilities. God bless 🙏🙏🙏 to our honorable PM. He is a God for our country right now 🙏 Everyone must support him to fulfill his wishes to save his countrymen. Jai Hind! !! Best wishes to all in this endeavour!! Kudos to railway! Please do the needful. Thanks 😊
Very good idea, but we hope that situation will not come.
