No assembly or sports, classes in shifts — the likely new normal in schools after lockdown
New Delhi: No morning assembly, no seminars and no sports events, this is how schools across the country are likely to function once they reopen post the Covid-19 lockdown.
Schools and colleges across the country have been closed since the second week of March and while there is no clarity on when they will reopen, the Modi government has begun working on a plan that will be put in place once students are back in classrooms, ThePrint has learnt.  
According to senior officials in the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD), the National Council for Educational Research and Training (NCERT) has been tasked with developing a post-lockdown plan for schools.  
Confirming the development, NCERT Director Hrushikesh Senapathy said, “MHRD has tasked NCERT with formulating guidelines for schools, which are being worked on. This will include directions for various stakeholders including school management, teachers, parents and students.”  
Also read: Govt turns to ‘TV classrooms’ as online lessons prove to be a challenge during lockdown
According to sources, some of the guidelines that are being worked out include banning social activities such as seminars, sports events and even assembly gatherings for upto a year. The safety guidelines will be made available to schools before the government decides to order their re-opening.  
“There are a number of things that we will have to look at … how to maintain distance between students in school buses, while they are sitting in the classrooms and even when they are using the washroom, because a large number of students use a single washroom in schools,” a source told ThePrint.   
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“The bigger challenge will be to ensure the younger children maintain distance; they usually sit close and mingle a lot more than the older ones. The safety guidelines that we will form will include all these things,” the source added.  
Experts are also discussing running the schools in two shifts, a practise already followed in some states. NCERT experts have also sought data from different states on the number of teachers, students and infrastructure in schools to assess if shifts will be possible in the schools.  
The idea of having a post lock-down plan was also discussed by the HRD Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank during his interaction with education ministers of various states. During the interaction, Nishank asked states to keep a post-lockdown plan ready for schools, keeping in mind all norms of social distancing. 
Also read: JEE Mains and NEET in July, IIT entrance test in August — HRD minister announces dates
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Please sir ish saal aap school reopen Matt marna….agar reopen kiya b hum apne baccho ko school nahi bhejne wale …becoz bacche social distancing rule follow nahi kar payenge…agar ye bimari school me chali gayi na bahut problem..bahut badi problem create ho jayengi sir….baccho K sath risk na le..chache woh 5th grade k ho ya 11 12 grade k…don’t reopen the school 🙏
I’m going to attend the board exam next year ….If government doesn’t reopen schools or conduct online classes for the whole year …It would create a problem bcoz of lots of disturbances .or other technical issues..Most of the students are not attending online classes daily ..govt should take a better step to reopen the schools …Finally I want to say jst online studies are not enough bcoz we have a vast syllabus and many other competitive exams are conducting every year …scls should reopen..By taking proper measurements. .
My two daughters are 8th and 10th standard. Schools should be opened because online clasess are not good.
I think online classes are not good enough.So I think school should reopen in June or July.Many students bunk classes and I am in 12th standard and very worried about my future.I think students who are going to participate in board next year should get a chance for studying in school.Otherwise board exams should be conducted in months of June and July next year so we will get much more time for our exams.B because online classes are not giving us benefits
Sir I’m in class 12 sir I think that  school should be reopened by June as online classes are much beneficial due to lots of disturbances online classes are not that much benificaial most of the students are unable to attend online classes lack of concentration and bad qualities are another problem sir plz try to reopen schools with screening while entering school and suitable steps for making our future good
Just take the fees and do online classes for all standards even for 11th and 12th….
If you want to live don’t go to school
start the school for 8th std students and above after the situation is ok because we will need to start as for childrens future as all may not be able to join the online class so higher standard students are matire enoufh and mask shoukd complusary no activties only basic imoprtanlectires and reduce the school hours that it eveeythwin will run smooth but start the school colleges after as soon as lockdown is over and there should be strictly rule mad to school and colleges to the teacher to look about the mask thing and social distancing upto particular distance
I am in 12th class this year and very much worried about my future, truly online classes is not that good idea for me as it creates a lot of difference in studies, I just hope government would find out a better way for attending the class or rather close the school for whole year
Schools had to be started , when let the Govt. & think tanks decide it . As I think this is a first of its kind . But its not the end . Hereafter calamities of this type might be repeated . May be naturally or because_of international scenario itself is getting changed . Our next generations must get trained to handle such situations. But all the safety measures & standard procedure must be implemented . This must be ensured by school staff , managements , parents and Govt officials . Our future pillars of Nation ought to be safeguarded at all the costs. We being responsible citizens has responsibility to make them fit , tougher & facing the challenge successfully .
Firstly the health of the youth is to be taken care of in this situation not of opening of schools , for the safety of the life of the students online classes to be schedule till the next year.
Exactly true
100% true
Schools should not be open because it will increase the chance of exposure to corona virus because even senior students will not be able to maintain the distance and precautions that they are maintaining in their home and some schools are very small with a large student capacity in each section like 70+ in one section which will increase the chance of exposure.
For students of below class VIII, on line classes are required to be made compulsory up to next year. For students of class VIII and above, they can attend offline classes in school, for those students social distancing, sanitizing to be strictly followed and sitting accomodation may be planned accordingly, under the strict supervision of one Govt officer deputed to each school.
What’s wrong with the government the corona cases are increasing but the government is thinking to open schools
Great work modiji and the bjp government!   But for you I wonder what would have happened to us in this time of distress!!!  Modiji ki Jai ho!  Bharat Mata Ki Jai ho!  Sanatana dharma ki jai ho!  Loka Samasta Sukhino Bhavantu!  Jai mata di!
Just drop the idea of opening schools before vacination.no assembly,no sports,distancing between students then what’s the need to attend school..
Just for collecting fees do not keep the schools open..
Just give online classes ,collect 80% fees and finish it..
