Punjab curfew proves dangerous for women with 21% spurt in domestic violence complaints
Chandigarh: There has been a 21 per cent increase in complaints of crimes against women in Punjab during the Covid-19 curfew, according to police data released Thursday. 
There were 5,695 complaints of crimes against women between 21 March and 20 April, Punjab Police said in a press statement, as compared to 4,709 between 20 February and 20 March. The state has been under a curfew since 23 March, two days before the nationwide lockdown kicked in.
The number of domestic violence complaints during the curfew period stands at 3,993 as compared to 3,287 between February and March — also a rise of 21 per cent.
The press statement quoted Director General of Police (DGP) Dinkar Gupta as saying that there had been a substantial decrease in the number of complaints registered for dowry harassment, rape and “eve-teasing (sexual harassment of women)”. This, he said, was probably because people were not stepping out of their homes and there was increased police presence around the state.
Also Read: Sufficient measures taken to defend domestic violence victims amid lockdown, AAP tells Delhi HC
According to the data, the average number of calls received on DIAL 112, the emergency response helpline, had increased to 133 per day between 21 March and 20 April, up from an average of 99 in the preceding three months. As many as 34 per cent of these calls pertained to domestic violence cases, police said.
The press statement followed a video conference Thursday between DGP Gupta and the deputy superintendents of police (DSPs) associated with the crimes-against-women cell. 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
It was decided during the meeting that a daily report detailing such complaints, along with the action taken, will be sent to the head office, the statement noted. The DGP added that police efforts in this area will involve coordination with counsellors nominated by the department of social security, women and child development.
Every call about crimes against women, Gupta said, is received at 112 and forwarded to district control rooms as well as the district women help desks. The women’s response team then calls up the complainants and visits the women in distress. In cases of physical abuse, a medical examination follows, he added, and criminal proceedings launched if a case is made out.
Also Read: Indian women are locked in with their abusers, but are finding new ways to seek help
