India shouldn’t struggle with Covid-19 lockdown. It organises Kumbh Mela much better
Across the globe, the reaction of countries to the Covid-19 pandemic is to lock down borders both internal and external. The world’s largest democracy, India, too has belatedly decided to do the same.
The pandemic, however, has demonstrated a stark reality: countries — such as Singapore and South Korea — that invested in human capital, especially education and health, are doing better than others.
India’s abysmal investment in human capital will be one of the challenges that will stymie the Narendra Modi government’s efforts to combat the pandemic.
Also read: This is the team advising PM Modi in India’s battle against coronavirus
As of now, the world’s largest democracy of 1.3 billion people, has only reported 727 confirmed cases and 20 deaths. That incredibly low number will, however, rise in the coming days and weeks.
The lockdown will impose a strain on not just India’s healthcare system but also its transport infrastructure, including delivery of food, water and essential services. India struggles in providing basic goods and services to its people under normal conditions.
The Indian state, however, has the potential for mobilising and executing complex logistical feats.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The Kumbh Mela, one of the largest religious gatherings in the world, is held every 12 years. Each time, states across northern India are able to ensure that millions of pilgrims and tourists attending the religious assembly have access to food, sanitation, water, and electricity.
For the 2019 gathering, attended by 150 million people, a temporary city was constructed; special trains and planes carried pilgrims and tourists; and a special police force and district administration were created.
Yet, within 24 hours after the start of the current Indian lockdown due to coronavirus, there are reports of doctors and essential service personnel being prevented from movement, trucks carrying food and essential services being stranded on highways and a sense of panic on the streets.
This begs the question: how can India ensure excellent arrangements for millions of people for a once-in-six-years religious gathering while it fails to provide the same basic amenities to its citizens on a regular basis and especially during a pandemic?
Also read: Modi’s Covid-19 lockdown speech shows he doesn’t learn from past mistakes, or doesn’t care 
It all comes down to determining priorities and executing plans effectively. Indians have, for thousands of years, demonstrated their capacity to build and maintain functioning cities.
Archaeologists have found evidence of well laid out and planned cities from the Indus Valley civilisation, one of the oldest in the world and the oldest in the Indian subcontinent. Harappa and Mohenjodaro, built around 5,000 years ago, had public as well as private bathrooms, covered drains, streets arranged so that they could be regularly cleaned, and granaries for their residents.
If a country inheriting that civilisational legacy now has an abysmal record on these fronts, it reflects poor governance, not an inherent incapacity for organisation and discipline.
Also read: Modi’s poorly planned lockdown won’t save us from coronavirus, but will kill economy
India’s healthcare is an area where mis-governance has undermined the development of human capital. Healthcare is important for developing human capital, because a sick population loses productivity and drains resources from the healthy to care for the ill. Unfortunately, India has failed to invest in the type of healthcare infrastructure needed to support its population.
The Indian government has been slow in providing its people with serious preventative care — immunisation, access to safe water, decent sanitation, and nutritional support for children. This shifts a disproportionate amount of healthcare costs onto individuals.
India spends 1.28 per cent of GDP on health, and has one of the world’s lowest shares of public spending in total health spending (29 per cent) and one of the highest share of private spending (71 per cent) and share of out of pocket private spending (61 per cent) in total health spending.
The Indian government regulates healthcare tightly, but the centrally administered health networks are grossly dysfunctional. If we look at the supply side, even though the government spends money on primary care infrastructure and personnel, it delivers care that is no better in competence and much more labour-intensive than the private sector. Turning to the demand side, surveys show that patients often prefer to go to a fee-charging doctor who will treat them with more consideration even when private doctors are less qualified than doctors in government hospitals.
Also read: I am no fan of Modi, but I support coronavirus lockdown. Opposition should too
India also faces a shortage of trained doctors. According to a 2015 study, India needs at least 400,000 physicians to fit its needs, but barely has 90,000 qualified professionals. Moreover, India also suffers from brain drain in the healthcare sector.
Over the years, India has underinvested in its cities, its institutions, and most of all its people. Unlike many of India’s challenges, the failure to invest in human capital is not a product of ideological divide. It is the function of petty political division, legacies of big government, lack of foresight, and the type of simple mismanagement that is common to developing countries.
Faced with a pandemic that has the ability to test every institution of governance, the Indian state needs to respond in the same coordinated manner that it does when it comes to the Kumbh Mela. Smart but difficult statecraft is necessary to pull India out of this crisis.
The author is Research Fellow and Director, India Initiative at the Washington-DC based Hudson Institute. Her books include ‘Escaping India: Explaining Pakistan’s Foreign Policy’ (Routledge, 2011), ‘From Chanakya to Modi: The Evolution of India’s Foreign Policy’ (Harper Collins, 2017) and ‘Making India Great: The Promise of a Reluctant Global Power’ (Harper Collins, 2020). Views are personal.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
This  is just an observation. Print is an Indian news paper . Say what you want to say but this India, India parroting is obnoxious and pathetic. Low in self esteem. Does it have to  shout India, India in all headlines? Do the readers not understand your reference point is India? What is the difference between you and RSS gang that shouts Jai Sri Ram at the drop of a hat?
It looks only Modi hater authors are given media space by ThePrint.
I have not come across a more stupid (regret the usage, but nothing more is apt) comparison. Kumbh mela is planned months (if not years ) ahead of event. It is restricted to a small geographical area compared to whole of India.  And finally it is an event not  a pandemic !  Strongly recommend to Print to do some quality check before printing. Last few columns have been junk !
One of the common theme of articles in  Anti-Modi media is that most of the columnists do realise in their hearts  that handling of  Corona virus crisis by Modi  government is  correct. But they  are not willing to admit it honestly. They come out on daily and hourly basis with funny stories and arguments  to dominise the  MAN –Modi — due to inherent hatred imbibed by them under influence of their ex-masters. They started criticizing  package for poor announced by the  honorable  Finance Minister  before  she completed her  press conference.   Todays  RBI  initiative is pooh poohed before its fine prints are out. Most of the economic Journalists in India are drawing  room  veterans . They even don t know Indian Industrial units, Construction entities face labour shortage after  Holi when every years lakhs of  daily wage workers, casual workers migrate from cities to village to participate in harvesting of food grains in most parts of  India. They have forgotten recent history of demonetisation , when informal jobs were suddenly reduced , but India and Indian economy bounced back within  no time. The present crisis are not time to show your  allegiance to your erst-while  ex-rulers. It is time of national and international level human crisis not faced by the countries of the world and  India  during last seven decades since the end of WW -II. So don t spread panic. Don t spread rumours.  At least keep watching  how  a  Government dedicated to cause of people  tames  the dreaded virus. Humanity always wins .
“The pandemic, however, has demonstrated a stark reality: countries — such as Singapore and South Korea — that invested in human capital, especially education and health, are doing better than others.” If this is true then Western Europe and the United States haven’t invested in human capital. So guess the author is better off advising her own country the US, then worrying about India.
Filling up matters without substance. Comparing Sjkngapre/South Korea to India itself started off in a wrong platter. Negativity in the whole body. No matter what you do, it cannot change.
Views expressed seem to be biased . Kumbh Mela  is organized in a specified geographical area , whereas pandemic has no geographical bounds .
