Govt places order for 10 crore hydroxychloroquine tablets with Ipca labs and Zydus Cadila
New Delhi: The country’s largest manufacturers of anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) — Ipca laboratories and Zydus Cadila — have bagged orders from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to supply around 10 crore tablets.
India is a leading player across the globe in the manufacturing of HCQ with Ipca laboratories, Zydus Cadila and Wallace Pharmaceuticals as top pharma companies.
Presently, the country’s production capacity is 20 crore tablets every month.
Shubhra Singh, chairman, National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA), a drug price and availability watchdog, is confident of the drugmakers production capabilities. “We are capable of producing 40 metric tons of HCQ every month (which means 20 crore pills of 200 mg). The drugmakers have built good production capacities as it is also used for rheumatoid arthritis,” she told ThePrint.
“We have confirmed that there are enough stocks across the country and the manufacturers have started supplying the drugs for government orders. If HCQ proves further relevance, its production can be jacked up,” she said.
The Centre has placed the order after the country’s apex health research body, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) recommended HCQ be used as a preventive medication for Covid-19 high risk group.
ICMR has also recommended the use of the drug for those involved in the care of ‘suspected or confirmed cases of the coronavirus and for asymptomatic household contacts of laboratory confirmed patients, apart from healthcare workers who are involved in the treatment of Covid-19.’
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
A mail sent to IPCA laboratories and Zydus Cadila did not fetch a response till the time of publishing.
US President Donald Trump has called chloroquine a potential “game changer” for treating the disease caused by the novel coronavirus SARS-COV-2. Hydroxychloroquine is a derivative of chloroquine, with lesser side-effects.
Last month, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) partially lifted a three-year-old ‘import alert’ on Ipca’s two plants to import the medicine. Zydus Cadila has also received a “sizeable” order from the US for the decades-old drug.
Cadila’s spokesperson earlier told ThePrint that the company can “even quadruple our capacities if need be as we are fully integrated to produce both API and finished dose formulation. We believe that we will be able to cater to the requirements as we are among the few companies in the world who have capabilities to manufacture the drug in large quantities.”
FDA commissioner Dr Stephen Hahn said the regulator is preparing to test chloroquine in a clinical trial with coronavirus patients.
Also read: $50mn for hydroxychloroquine clinical trial to new testing tech — top Covid-19 research news
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
It’s very sad that India’s oldest manufacturer of Hydroxychloroquine ( HCQ) and pioneer in this field ‘ BENGAL CHEMICALS’ disndi get the order!
Could you order for any other phama company. Only two company in india .
We are interested to buy from BCPL, if they have availability of HCQ of any quantity per day basis.
.   When India is  the highest producer of  HCQ tablets and  having the capacity  to produce and meet up  the demands of the  rest of the world,  I think it’s an opportunity  for India to extend it’s helping hand to  the  suffering world to save lives .Once again India will emerge as the  Saver of Mankind  and as the VISHWA GURU .
