Come to your balcony today, wear black, slam Uddhav — BJP gives ‘bartan bajaao’ political twist
Mumbai: Two months after Prime Minister Narendra Modi asked people to come into their balconies and clap for the essential services battling Covid-19 on the frontlines, the BJP has called for a similar showcase of public sentiment in Maharashtra, although with a different objective.
Come 11.30 am Friday, the BJP, which is in opposition in the state, wants Maharashtra residents to dress in black, enter their balconies, and display placards with slogans against the ruling Shiv Sena-NCP-Congress government led by Uddhav Thackeray.
The idea is to protest against what the BJP describes as the Maha Vikas Aghadi (MVA) government’s inability to handle the coronavirus crisis. As of Thursday, Maharashtra had recorded 41,642 coronavirus cases, the highest in the country. Of these, 11,726 patients have recovered while 1,454 have died. 
The campaign, named ‘Mera Angan, Mera Ranangan (my home, my battlefield) – Save Maharashtra’, is specifically aimed at Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray, a former ally of the BJP. 
Discussing the planned protest with the media Wednesday evening, Maharashtra BJP president Chandrakant Patil said “people should wear black clothes or masks or even dupattas”. 
“The placards should have slogans against the ‘Thackeray sarkar (Thackeray government)’. The situation is spiralling out of control and the government is not doing enough to contain the pandemic,” he added.
The BJP has asked all its workers to spread the word so the protest can be a success. “We want the people to maintain social distancing during this protest,” Patil said.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Shiv Sena spokesperson Manisha Kayande has criticised the planned protest. “There is a pandemic. The government is doing everything it can. The BJP wants people to wear black masks and dupattas and is asking them to stand on their balconies with placards. Is this a joke?” she said, addressing the media Thursday. 
Maharashtra Revenue Minister Balasaheb Thorat of the Congress lashed out at the BJP for attempting to whip up an anti-government sentiment at a time when the state is caught in an unprecedented crisis. “The BJP wants to destabilise the government. This has been long on their agenda,” Thorat told TV news channels. 
Also Read: Uddhav Thackeray has failed to handle Covid crisis. Bring in Army to save Mumbai
The protest doesn’t seem to have enthused others in the opposition.
Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) leader Sandeep Deshpande said public sentiment had turned against Thackeray government but the BJP’s way of highlighting it is wrong. 
The MNS is led by Raj Thackeray, who is Uddhav’s cousin, and the party has been inching close to the BJP of late. “I think there is a public sentiment against the Thackeray government. Initially, it was not so but now this sentiment is there. There is a failure on the part of the government machinery,” Deshpande said. “The way in which the BJP is doing it is wrong,” he added. 
Terming the BJP protest “outrageously hypocritical”, Congress Rajya Sabha MP Kumar Ketkar said the party should also look at Gujarat, where it is in office. As of Thursday, Gujarat had the third highest total of Covid-19 cases recorded in India, with 12,537 cases, over 5,000 cured or discharged, and 749 deaths.
“Their own party cannot manage the situation in Gujarat. That state has half the population of Maharashtra and the management of the crisis is the worst,” Ketkar added. “Gujarat is the worst-attended state. All those who are protesting tomorrow should tell their government in Gujarat what to do before telling the Maharashtra government, which is doing a much better job than in BJP-ruled states.” 
Also Read: Uddhav Thackeray is winning over even his critics with calm demeanour and strong decisions
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
This is no time for politics.  Everyone must put their hands to tackle this pandemic. Even a small effort will be welcome.
Mumbai, Pune maybe packed, but try to ensure as much social distancing as possible. Avoid opening of unnecessary office or shops.Avoid maximum people in public areas.
Use mask, soap, sanitizer.
Support hospitals with masks, ppe kits. Give moral support to health staff and all involved in fighting this VIRUS.
Shameful that the BJP is engaging in political opportunism in the middle of a life-and-death crisis of gigantic proportions. They ought to support the Maharashtra Government, as Mumbai is the engine of India’s economy.  Instead they are trying to score political points with an eye on the CM’s gaddi.
The guidelines and status during lockdown 3 should be immediately implemented.The rising trend will further grim the situation in coming days. The frontline workers are coming under the grip, any short of relaxation like opening of  govt offices with increased strength as compared to lockdown3 will pose serious issue without any benefit. Govt offices should be opened as per need basis and for essential services. Without public transport it will pose serious threat and open new dimension to problem.
If  USA cant handle the situation in NY, our state govt is far better in handling Maharashtra  and specailly Mumbai.
If Mumbai like city was in USA the death nos would hv crossed 15 lac till now.
Its not only lock down which has minimized the deaths but also the efforts  the State Govt has taken
The frotntliners  is the State Govt., Police , Doctors, Hospital Staff,BMC, BEST, Railways  and the citizens  themselves.
Those who critisise Maharashtra govt are ignorant about COVID-19. Mah govt should be appreciated for reporting honestly. The disease trajectory depends on many factors including population density and screening efficiency. Also, what matters is if the health authorities are targetting right population for screening. US and Europe could show huge outbreak because not only the higher percentage of elderly population with comorbidities  but also efficient screening. Ignorant politicians and their supporters won’t understand this.
Is this the time for a blame game or work together leaving differences aside . Mumbai is the commercial capital and needs attention at all costs rather than play political games . I sincerely urge each and every Mumbai and residents of maharashtra don’t fall into this political , hypocritical crap .
Most of the people who against Maharashtra Govt are ignorant about COVID-19. Maharashtra govt is honest enough to report actual cases and efficient in carrying out tests than other states. The disease trajectory is determined by many factors including population density and efficiency of surveillance. 60-80% cases are asymptomatic so the magnitude that seems high is due to screening efficiency.
BJP is playing it’s dirty agenda again
It’s Modi who has brought situation to this stage  by his stupid decisions.
Absolute mismanagement and  nautanki by him.
Now they are blaming Uddhav to divert attention .
Mumbai is International Hub.
Population density is peak.
Migrants from all over the world are coming and going.
Besides the lockdown decision was ill concieved.
