Funny videos, TikTok dances, serious info — how social media has responded to coronavirus
New Delhi: The number of coronavirus cases in India has surged to 60 as two fresh cases were reported from Rajasthan and Delhi Wednesday. More and more people on the streets have taken to wearing masks, while the sale of hand sanitisers has shot up.
Social media users, meanwhile, are also trying to do their bit, sharing information about the infection and the ways to tackle it, along with humourous memes and viral dances.
ThePrint brings you a selection:
Sawani Dutta, popularly known by her YouTube persona ‘Bengali Aunty’, has written and sung a hilarious song about the handwashing techniques being circulated by the US government’s Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Meanwhile, Nepali singer Almoda Rana Uprety has a more serious take in the form of this coronavirus prevention video for children.
“Since kids are the most vulnerable in this crisis, they should be encouraged to keep a healthy hygiene specially,” Uprety writes in the description on YouTube.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 

Bhojpuri singers Khushboo and Pravin Uttam have also conveyed an important message through their song ‘Hello Kaun, Coronavirus’ — it’s advisable to avoid romance in the time of the disease.
In the video, Khushboo’s character resists meeting her lover as he’s just returned from China and is showing symptoms. “Our romance can only happen on the phone now, there is no chance of us meeting,” she sings.

Also read: How self-quarantine can ‘flatten the epidemic curve’ as coronavirus cases rise
TikTok users have also used their creativity to make coronavirus information videos. Dancer Quang Dang’s video, derived from an animated video shared by the Vietnam Health Ministry last month, has gone viral.
The United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organisation has also put out a TikTok video on all the ways people can greet each other, as shaking hands has become a hazard.
Indian actor Gurmeet Choudhary followed suit, refusing to close in for a hug.
Also read: How China’s authoritarianism ‘aided’ its fight against coronavirus
Meanwhile, Twitter has, as usual, seen memes galore.
Mike Madden, deputy editor of The Washington Post’s Outlook section did a fresh take on the ‘Distracted Boyfriend’ meme. According to him, there’s little competition between masks and sanitisers at this time.
pic.twitter.com/AV2w5d7vOh
— Mike Madden (@MikeMadden) February 28, 2020
The National University of Singapore’s ‘Handshake Alternatives’ is also being shared widely — it recommends things like a simple ‘elbow’ or ‘footshake’ the next time you meet an acquaintance.
Which one are you doing! #wave #footshake #elbowbump or #hiding ? #CoronaVirusUpdates #washyourhands #keepsave #Corvid19 #CoronaVirus @HeartOTXHeartMD @AnastasiaSMihai @rwyeh @biljana_parapid @purviparwani @SamRRazaMD @DBelardoMD @JGrapsa @garand_f pic.twitter.com/w2Sn94MLA3
— Dr. Martha Gulati (@DrMarthaGulati) March 5, 2020
This report has been updated to reflect the correct spelling of Sawani Dutta.
