Modi focuses on reviving economy in chat with CMs, but warns Covid cases will spike in June
New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi Monday said the economy needs reviving and hinted at easing restrictions after 3 May when the lockdown is scheduled to end, but also warned chief ministers that there could be a spike in Covid-19 cases in June-July and asked them to be prepared.
In a video conference with chief ministers, the fourth such since the lockdown began, Modi said the country needed to focus on the economy while dealing with the pandemic.
“We have to give importance to the economy as well as continue the fight against Covid-19,” Modi said in the meeting that was also attended by cabinet ministers Amit Shah, Rajnath Singh and Nirmala Sitharaman.
The PM’s thrust to prioritise the economy, even as CMs of Odisha, Meghalaya, Goa and Puducherry advised caution in lifting the lockdown, reflects the Centre’s growing concern over the adverse impact due to the pandemic and the resultant large scale job losses and livelihood.
Also read: Covid-19 Battle: Are Indian chief ministers measuring up or need strong central oversight?
Only nine CMs, who could not speak during the earlier interactions with the prime minister, spoke. Most of the remaining CMs gave in written submissions. However, Kerala CM Pinarayi Vijayan skipped the meeting, which left a discordant note.
A Kerala government official told ThePrint that since he was not among the CMs listed to speak at the meeting, he deputed his chief secretary to attend.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Puducherry Chief Minister V Narayanasamy told reporters that the mood in the meeting leaned towards extending the lockdown, but with some relaxation.
“Most of the CMs said the way in which cases are increasing, there should be a cautious approach & PM should take a call on the basis of observation of CMs. Most of the BJP-ruled states’ CMs said that lockdown should be continued and economic activities be started slowly,” Narayanasamy said.
Odisha CM Naveen Patnaik told the PM that the lockdown should be extended until 3 June while Meghalaya CM Conrad Sangma tweeted that relaxations should be allowed in green zones, i.e., non Covid-19 affected districts.
“We have mooted to continue with the lockdown post May 3rd with relaxation on activities in Green Zones or Non-Covid affected districts in #Meghalaya. #CovidUpdates,” Sangma tweeted.
At the video conference called by the Hon’ble PM @narendramodi ji  and Hon’ble Home Minister, @AmitShah ji. We have mooted to continue with the lockdown post May 3rd with relaxation on activities in Green Zones or Non-Covid affected districts in #Meghalaya.#CovidUpdates pic.twitter.com/rMrS6j3cPP
— Conrad Sangma (@SangmaConrad) April 27, 2020

Also read: 8 am to midnight, it’s ‘out-of-sight’ Amit Shah who’s quietly managing India’s Covid crisis
Senior government officials told ThePrint that though a final call on extending the lockdown will be taken just ahead of 3 May, the PM’s comments indicate that relaxations could be introduced to ensure more economic activities and see life return to normalcy in areas that do not have any Covid-19 cases or have managed to contain its spread.
“It will not be a one-size-fits-all approach. If relaxation is eased, it will vary from state to state,” said a senior government official who did not want to be named.
Several CMs raised the issue of economic revival of states and reiterated their demand for a financial package from the Centre. Uttarakhand CM Trivendra Singh Rawat also suggested to the PM that the duration of MGNREGA wage employment be increased to 150 days from the present 100 days.
Narayanasamy told reporters that the government should announce a stimulus package along the lines of UPA’s 2008 package for revival of the economy.
In December 2008, the UPA government had announced a stimulus package to help the economy during the global recession. As part of the package, additional resources and incentives were given to boost exports and help sectors like infrastructure and housing among others.
Also read: Modi’s Covid-19 strategy has Congress party’s ‘first family’ split in its political response
Modi told CMs that now was the time to think of a way ahead for the country, which has been in a lockdown since 25 March.
Quoting experts, the PM said that the impact of coronavirus will remain visible in the coming months and hence it is important that states not only direct their efforts towards converting Red Zones (hot spots) to Orange Zones (where no case has been reported in 14 days) and eventually green zones (where no case has been reported in 28 days), but everybody adheres to the protocol of social distancing and wearing masks in public places.
“Masks and face covers will become part of our lives in the days ahead,” Modi said, adding that under the circumstances, everyone’s aim must be rapid response.
The PM also noted that many people were self-declaring themselves based on cough-cold symptoms, and said it was a welcome sign.
Also read: India announced lockdown the same time as South Africa but has over 7 times new cases since
Underlining the impact of lockdown, Modi told CMs that it yielded positive results as the country has managed to save thousands of lives in the past one and a half months.
“The situation in many countries, including India, was almost similar at the start of March. However, due to timely measures, India has been able to protect many people,” Modi said, but warned that the danger of the virus was far from over and constant vigilance is of essential.
Modi also emphasised the importance of using technology as much as possible and also making use of the current time to embrace reform measures. Urging more people to download the AarogyaSetu app to bolster efforts to control Covid-19, the PM said, “We have to be brave and bring in reforms that touch the lives of common citizens.”
Modi also addressed the issue of Indians living overseas who wish to return, and reassured CMs that the government was working on it while keeping in mind that families do not face any risk of infections.
Also read: Covid hasn’t gone viral in India yet, but some in the world & at home can’t accept the truth
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
