Modi govt wants CBSE, NCERT, colleges to revise academic calendar due to Covid-19 lockdown
New Delhi: The Ministry of Human Resource Development (HRD) has decided to revise the academic calendar for schools and colleges following the Prime Minister’s announcement of a 21-day lockdown from Tuesday midnight to battle the coronavirus pandemic.
The HRD ministry late Tuesday sent a circular to all the states and autonomous bodies such as the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE), the National Council for Educational Research and Training (NCERT), the University Grants Commission (UGC) and the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), asking them to work on an alternate academic calendar.
B.V.R.C. Purushottam, Private Secretary to HRD Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank, confirmed this. “On the orders of the minister, we sent a circular to all the states and autonomous bodies last night. It was based on the orders of the MHA (Ministry of Home Affairs),” he said. “Autonomous bodies and NCERT have been asked to draft alternate academic calendars.”
Also read: This is how Modi govt plans to help MGNREGA workers during Covid-19 lockdown
Schools affiliated to the CBSE traditionally begin their new sessions in the first week of April and then break for summer vacations in May or June depending on different schools and classes. The session then resumes between July and August. Many state boards also follow a similar calendar of completing exams before April, and declaring vacations from May before restarting in July.
This pattern, however, will have to be changed this year as schools cannot reopen in the first week of April due to the lockdown.
As far as higher education institutions are concerned, most institutes ensure a break in May, after finishing exams by April. The new session begins between late July and early August.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Sources in the government said discussions are on to consider the lockdown as a vacation period for schools and start the new session once the situation returns to normal. The modalities of the arrangement are still being worked out.
Also read: Desi sex and porn for women — how Indians stuck at home are indulging their secret desires
The government has also asked CBSE, the National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS), and the National Testing Agency (NTA) to work on a revised schedule of entrance exams.
As of now, only the Joint Entrance Exam (JEE) has been rescheduled, but no new date has not been announced. There has been no decision on the rescheduling of the National Eligibility and Entrance Test (NEET), for medical colleges in the country, even though the admit cards are to be out by 27 March.
The order sent to the states and autonomous bodies also said the MHRD and all its autonomous bodies will remain closed for three weeks, but officers would work from home.
“In compliance of the order dated 24.3.2020 issued by MHA, all offices of MHRD and its autonomous institutions and subordinate offices shall remain closed for a period of three weeks. However, all officers and staff shall be working from home as per the said order,” the order sent to states and autonomous bodies read.
Also read: Dear Taslima Nasreen, God has no KRAs and will survive coronavirus pandemic
 
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Will the 2021 session of 10 and 12 be cancelled amidst the growing numbers of the coronavirus cases?.
Cause it’s really necessary life is important than school’s online classes,and their” Holiday homeworks”!.
The cbse should probably cancel 20-21 session.
It’s good for all.
I want to know that whether the session will restart in july or will be resumed , because there are many students who can’t clear their doubts in online classes
Promoting 9th and 11th students
of CBSE is not advisable. We must see that teachers are definitely working out for the betterment of students from their homes through remedial teaching online.
But in this lockdown period itself they issued text books and parents are foced to collect the books
I request you to all HRD ministers, education ministers and also CBSE that I’m the student of class 12 of Prince Public School and I have a problem regarding online classes .Due to lockdown all schools has been started online classes but in my school the syllabus is running very fast as the teachers has completed the 12 chapters in 14 Zoom meeting class and we are not able to manage this situation please take some initiative action regarding this situation.
I request to the cbse that many teachers who are going to out of station for board copy checking/ evaluation work far from his home town or schools they will Face a lot PROBLEM related to staying and food. In this pendamic situation. Therefore I request you give order to schools to arrange local teachers for this work OR make model centers to extra places so Teachers can do the work efficiently and without fear of CORONA VIRUS which can affect their lives from Hotels and travel from Train.
Abe jo final year pe hai, last sem ka exams unlogo ka kya? Koi bolega kuch? What will happen those final year undergraduate students? Will they get a degree? Will they be allowed to sit for exams? Because in an exam hall anyhow social distancing is maintained, so i guess exams can be conducted atleast
Please stop online education in schools till things come back to normal. All schools do not have equal infrastructure to support online classes. All school students may not have proper access to the online classes and class materials. Some schools are showing off their online class skills while other schools are struggling and forcing extra work to get study materials available online. It is going to create lot of inequality in the education system. Please stop the online mode of school education as India is not yet 100% efficient in it.
Yes agreed with this. It is also putting undue pressure on children to cope up with sudden bombardment of online teaching and parents also suffering due to this
Yes I totally agree not every school is taking online classes and those who are taking they do it for such  long hours that continuously looking at the screen harms our eyes and affects our brain in a way students are not even taking the classes seriously they are not effecctive at all.
I also agree with this as it is creating a lot of pressure on students . Teachers are not cooperating with students and they are just not able to study from these online classes.
Air with humble request most of the teachers are staying away from home town and they are unable to come back to meet their children’s,parents because of lockdown so please don’t consider lockdown period as summer vaccation.
What about seba . Cbse is only not the one in this lockdown seba is there too. Plz I request that the government should think about seba too not only cbse because seba is in trouble too. We have lost almost our mid term exams.
I want to ask something , according to the weather culture we have summer holidays due to hot and unbearable weather in may month. Cities like Chandrapur, Nagpur temperature goes beyond the 45 degrees in May month . So what about this, how the children  will attend and tolerate this much hot weather. Please think about it.
Class 9 and 11 students should be prompted because they have to face board examination next year.They have to prepare for board examination and competitive exams during the locked down period.Take decision as quick as possible.
When will the CBSE 12th exam to be resumed? Presently we are under 21days lockdown… if this pandemic situation needs further extension of this lockdown for our own well being , then for how long can the board students wait for the remaining exams. Then the students should atleast secure an average marks on the basis of the subjects till the exams have been conducted before lockdown. At least student of the pandemic year could be considered. If possible cbse should look into it.
Delhi cbse promoted class 1 to 9 and 11 everyone.
What about class 12 exam that has rescheduled due to covid-19 will they be able give examination….
Focus on quality generation
Sir will undergraduation exams in Uttar Pradesh cancelled…? Telll me
No they will be rescheduled in upcoming months
Sir the students of class 9 and 11 must be promoted no one should be failed in these two classes as they don’t have much importance in later life. But boards exam will decide it next year itself pls . I request our hon’ble PM Modi sir to implement this rule . Thank you sir.
Sir i request u to promote all students from class 9 and 11 because of the pandemic. The students can focus on the 10th standard potions. Since the portions are very vast
And the teachers wont be able to complete the potions.
This is the request to up govt. and cbse board to start new session 2020-21 from july itself except board classes. Thanks
CBSE, I request you to release 2020-21 syllabus/ curriculum for secondary and senior secondary classes, to prepare for year plan and break up syllabus for new academic year.
What about the exams of standard 9th ?
Pls promote Maharashtra board 9th and 11 th students you can add the previous exam marks of 1 semester if you promote us it will help us to prepare for our board exams and it could help for decrease in coronavirus
Why u r consider this lockdown as vacation as all the people are on duty form their home they all r working form houses this is injustice for their hard work and there further planning for the vacations and many people are not in their own homes becoz of lockdown they are stuck to their work place only
What about compartment and re-test exam of 9 and 11 classes. However, most of the schools have not taken exam for cbse board please tell me your answer
Lock down period should not be considered as vacation.People have already booked their tickets for June.Airlines do not refund money.More over in extreme hot weather students cannot study in the class.New session should start from July.June should be considered as vacation.
Yes you are right. We shall not be able to study in so much hot weather under only 4 fans. We should be given vacations whether the outbreak is there or not
FYI Airline companies have extended the ticket to 365 days u can plan accordingly. If u’ve thought of refund the options are available.
U tell em👌🏻
Hii iam a hs 1st year student of seba board of assam and iam studing arts stream in darrang college tezpur assam sonitpur what the thinking of all state board about class 11and12 final exams .
According to new order issued by government of India for education board of all states including CBSE all of them were ordered to make a new academic calendar . For e.g. summer vacation ,winter vacation will not to given by school authority. You just stay at your home and do your study as humanities or arts stream is also not so easy. AHSEC will conduct your exam again when this condition of covid 19 becomes normal or after the reopening of lockdown
WISHING U A BRIGHT FUTURE
Sir plz promote the students of class 9.nd 11 because in most schools exams are not conduct so please promote students because if they conduct exams now so it will be time waste so plz promote class 9 nd 11 students
You are right
The decision for 10th and 12th class is taken board exam datesheet will be send again .please tell what about the students os 1st to 8th in delhi are they going to be promoted in next class.still no decision taken by DoE.other states already take the decision for govt school and for pvt school. Why still delhi is silent on it .please make this  confusion clear
Want to ask that as the gate counselling 2020  is going on and the application form for individual Iits are still open and don’t think that it will be extended or delayed.but still difficulties are faced by applicants as they have to apply for scale st or obc certificate in the prescribed format.as there is complete locked down so we are unable to complete the process as all the offices are shut down.its a humble request if for the time being all such sort of application form are extended .if possible please share it as much
Suggestion:Pharmacy Council of India can waive the Summer Practical and Theory Exam 2020 of First Year D.Pharm. in midst of COVID-19. PCI may send the directive to Respective States Technical Exam Conducting Boards.
Dear all ,
Covid-19 is a fatal for our life,it’s well known.here no vaccine or any medicine devised  so far.life has to be protected ,the best priority for all instead to ponder much over any other exams.first exam to secure life then next any exam to be appeared .kindly stay home ,stay safe and bless to god for all citizens to be safe and healthy rather to think more any other things of life .
Dear all ,
Covid-19 is a fatal for our life,it’s well known.here no vaccine or any medicine devised  so far.life has to be protected ,the best priority for all instead to ponder much over any other exams.first exam to secure life then next any exam to be appeared .kindly stay home ,stay safe and bless to god for all citizens to be safe and healthy rather to think more any other things of life .
What about 12 and 10 examinations that are left sir?????
It will be conducted again when this situation of covid 19 becomes normal . You just stay at your home and study .As PM Modi has ordered MHRD  to make a new academic calendar
These are not vacations. What about people with their reservations done for May? Airlines  will allow one time adjustment in dates but will not refund the full amount.Think of all these practical problems before taking any decisions.
Modi is the Best.
It is a good initiative by MHRD.
Considering this period as vacations,academic session can be resheduled,all actors the board and higher education,so that there is seamless admission etc all over the country.
Let the university in technical education start online classes and upload notes content so that students can make use of the holidays and once everything is normal let them take their semester exam directly for theory subjects
Let the university in technical education start online classes and upload notes content so that students can make use of the holidays and once everything is normal let them take their semester exam directly for theory subjects
What about NDA exam..will it postpone or not
We wish to have the same thing like Gujarat Government, let all the students get promoted this year from 1 St std to 12th std, even all the students are mentally scared because of corona virus,why don’t we promote all the children this year, somehow they have cancelled the exam’s, please do something.
No problem for corfew sir its not about us but its total large population of our india. After 21 days or more than that you can take but at least this virus will be remove from our environment i am also from class12 student i have to give my remaning exam .  please allah pak destroy this corona virus guys please pray to God he is only our hope to finish this problem.
👏👏👏🤲🙌
Suggestion: Govt. should promote D.Pharma 1st year students to 2nd year without conducting exams, if Corona virus spread continues till month May2020 and may be similarly for other technical courses.
Will neet exam be  rescheduled?
Health is first priority for students.
New session can be started in july also, but fitting with carona should be the best priority.
every one are thinking abt their education  and career…so as per now the situation is bad so health is given more priority then education so sir pls tell abt et tye of justice ur going to take for our degree final year students  examination still portion is not completed so we are requesting u to cancel the exam or else give sufficient time to restart clg  …….
Cbse should reduce the syllabus of class  x and xii.  It’s very difficult to complete their syllabus in a short duration.  It will be a burden for teachers as well as for students.  cbse has to think over this serious issue.
Bhai m class 12th Ka student hu nios board se mere exam honge BHI ya Nahi honge
The students live in a boring situation due to lockdown so all the School should start after the time when all will be normal.They find themselves happy when they are in school
is the govt. promote students of class 9 and 11?
Yes,  in CBSE board students are promoted to 10th and 12th
What about the seba board or the ncert? Will they be promoted?
what about the retest of class 9  and 11 ?. by late section how teacher complete the sllabus of the student of 10 and 12 ?.
Don’t panic Jaspreet..syllabus will be over efficiently.the holidays will be reduced.till then, if u r so much interested to study, there is a lot on internet which u can study.the steps taken by our PM are for our benefits, so follow them. Stay Home, Stay Safe. I am also a student, but of class 10 and I am maintaining my patience and u should also.The good days will return,Ok. CBSE will take care of it.
What about the cbse 12th board remaining exams, when these will reschedule and when we get the result of board finals to be submitted to institutions for admission in engineering?
Considering this outbreak as a vacation will be a setback as students won’t get any holidays to go out all of them are trapped in their houses with no outdoor play or vacation.
It would be better if you give them minimum 2 to 3 weeks holiday after the curfew and home quarantine is totally over so that students can go out and enjoy.
I am a new class 12 student but I still have to study as I am home quarantined and cannot go on a vacation.
Oh man!!! Are u a fool or a sucker? U want a vacation.i am also a student and experiencing sama as u are, but not exhilarating like u. Have patience till this virus gets over, everything will be fine and just holidays will be reduced.And if u r not satisfied with this, no need to attend school ,play outdoor games or go for a vacation or anything u like. Please co-operate. Read good books or study for next class and blah…blah .blah..Stay Home, Stay Safe. It’s important for our completion of syllabus that holidays are reduced. So again I am saying please Co -operate.
Aur kitni chutti chahiye bhai ? Itni kaafi nahi hai ? Waise hi ghar baith ke bahar jaane ka maan karega 🤣🤣🤣
As soon as everything is normal, Schools should start their new session. For Class 10 & 12 students, this lost time should be compensated in the summer vacation.
Please keep the burden of syllabus on the children in mind before taking any decision. Teachers will be forced to complete the portion, highly recommend reduction of syllabus if academic year starts late, keeping the safety of children as the utmost priority.
What about the retest of class 7 .have they promote the students
क्या NEET की परीक्षा तिथि में संशोधन हो सकता है,?
