Singer Kanika Kapoor tests COVID-19 positive, had partied with Vasundhara Raje & MP Dushyant
New Delhi: Hindi film singer Kanika Kapoor Friday became the first celebrity to test positive for COVID-19 in India. Kapoor and three other persons tested positive for the novel coronavirus in Lucknow, taking the total number of cases in Uttar Pradesh to 19.
Kapoor had returned to Lucknow from London on 15 March and shortly after noted she had signs of the flu. In an Instagram post, she said, “For the past 4 days I have had signs of flu, I got myself tested and it came positive for Covid-19. My family and I are in complete quarantine now and following medical advice on how to move forward… I was scanned at the airport as per normal procedure 10 days ago when I came back home, the symptoms have developed only 4 days ago.”

 
 Hello everyone, For the past 4 days I have had signs of flu, I got myself tested and it came positive for Covid-19.  My family and I are in complete quarantine now and following medical advice on how to move forward. Contact mapping of people I have been in touch with is underway aswell.  I was scanned at the airport as per normal procedure 10days ago when I came back home, the symptoms have developed only 4 days ago. At this stage I would like to urge you all to practice self isolation and get tested if you have the signs.  I am feeling ok, like a normal flu and a mild fever, however we need to be sensible citizens at this time and think of all around us. We can get through this without panic only if we listen to the experts and our local, state and central government directives. Wishing everyone good health.  Jai Hind ! Take care,  KK
A post shared by  Kanika Kapoor (@kanik4kapoor) on Mar 20, 2020 at 1:22am PDT

Kapoor also urged people to “practice self isolation and get tested if you have the signs”.
During her stay in Lucknow, Kapoor attended parties and even hosted one. Her father Rajiv Kapoor told Aaj Tak: “Six of us in our family are undergoing test today at 4pm. Kanika has attended three parties after her arrival. She came in contact with around 350-400 families in three parties. Along with Kanika, we are also in isolation.”
The celebrity singer also hosted a party for 100-200 people, which saw many officials and politicians in attendance. Also in attendance were BJP’s Lok Sabha MP Dushyant Singh, who went to Parliament Thursday, and former Rajasthan CM Vasundhara Raje, Singh’s mother.
After Kapoor tested positive, Singh and Raje have put themselves in self-quarantine.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
कुछ दिन पहले दुष्यंत और उनके ससुराल वालों के साथ मैं लखनऊ में एक डिनर पर गयी थी। कनिका कपूर, जो कि #Covid19 संक्रमित पाई गई हैं, वें भी उस डिनर में बतौर अतिथि मौजूद थीं। 
सावधानी के तौर पर मैं और दुष्यंत सेल्फ़-आइसोलेशन में हैं और हम सभी आवश्यक निर्देशों का पालन कर रहे हैं।
— Vasundhara Raje (@VasundharaBJP) March 20, 2020

Kapoor has been admitted to King George’s Medical University (KGMU) hospital in Lucknow. Officers of UP’s state health department notified residents of the apartment building she stayed at in the city. They also conducted tests on those who reportedly came in contact with the singer.
Kapoor, who is from Lucknow, began her career as a playback singer in 2014. She shot to fame with the song ‘Baby Doll’ from the movie Ragini MMS 2 which became widely popular. In 2015, she even won the Filmfare Award for Best Playback Singer (Female).

After ‘Baby Doll’, Kapoor went on to sing many more popular songs such as ‘Chittiyan Kalaiyan’ from the movie Roy and ‘Lovely’ from Shah Rukh Khan-starrer Happy New Year. In 2016, she was nominated for Best Female Playback Singer for ‘Lovely’ at the Global Indian Music Academy Awards in 2016.

Also read: Delhi govt orders closure of malls, exempts grocery, pharmacy stores in view of COVID-19
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
