Migrant crisis could’ve been averted if Modi’s One Nation One Ration Card scheme was ready
New Delhi: Hundreds of thousands of migrant labourers who left for their villages on foot with hardly any money or food after an unprecedented nationwide lockdown on 24 March could have been saved some of their misery had the Modi government expedited the implementation of the One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) scheme announced last June.
The government did step in after it faced widespread criticism, and provided food, temporary shelter and medical aid to the lakhs of workers who were in transit, to prevent infection because of overcrowding in bus terminals and on state and national highways.
But, according to food security experts, the chaos could have been somewhat avoided if the ONORC scheme was functional across the country and labourers had this card. The facility allows a beneficiary to access food grains that they are entitled to under the National Food Security Act (NFSA), 2013, from any fair-price shop in the country. The NFSA covers 80 crore people.
Currently, the scheme is operational in only 12 states and the Department of Food and Public Distribution intends to cover all states and union territories by June 2020.
Ravi Kant, Secretary, Department of Food and Public Distribution, tells ThePrint that the project is on track. “We have set a June 2020 deadline to cover all states and union territories under ONORC. We are going ahead as per schedule.”
Also read: Magic shows, PT, counselling — this Delhi shelter is taking special care of migrant workers
It was to ensure that the poor do not go hungry irrespective of where they are that the department had launched the scheme, which offered nationwide portability of ration cards, on a pilot basis last August in clusters of two states.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
An official in the Department of Food and Public Distribution said that ONORC involves bringing the data of all ration card holders on one server and integrating the existing public distribution system (PDS) information from states and union territories with the central system. This, the official added,  will allow beneficiaries to lift their food grains from any fair-price shop  where they live, using the same ration card.
 However, this would only be possible once the card holder provided biometrics for Aadhar authentication on ePoS (electronic point of sale) devices at fair price shops.
Asked if states are facing issues with portability in the 12 states because of poor internet connectivity in the interior areas, Ravi Kant said there were some teething problems initially, but now these issues have been sorted.  “It is running smoothly in the 12 states since January 2020,” he added.
Also read: Modi’s lockdown has worked, but now India needs Sanjivani Booti, not Hanuman’s mountain
According to the 2011 Census, 1.4 crore people in the country had migrated, both within and outside the states, for work.
Addressing a press conference last year, food minister Ram Vilas Paswan had said that the scheme was conceptualized specifically to cover migrant labourers and daily wagers.
Government sources told ThePrint that ONORC was discussed in one of the meetings of the empowered group constituted to come up with comprehensive strategies to deal with different issues pertaining to the Covid-19 pandemic.
Former chief economic adviser Arvind Subramaniam had also recommended the portability of food security benefits in the 2017 Economic Survey to address high labour migration in India.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
