Modi’s demonetisation will be of use during the coronavirus lockdown
The demonetisation disaster that Prime Minister Narendra Modi unleashed on Indians three years ago is now likely to come in handy during the 21-day nationwide coronavirus lockdown.
The self-induced demonetisation crisis in November 2016 wreaked havoc on the Indian economy, which has still not fully recovered. But there was one positive fallout of the shock treatment Modi gave Indians – more and more people went cashless and embraced digital payments, wire transfers and e-commerce.
That digital habit is what may see many middle class and wealthy Indians through the difficult coronavirus epidemic now.
Post-demonetisation, India saw a rapid and sustained spike in the usage of debit cards, digital wallets, and cashless transactions even at marketplaces. This meant that a large number of Indians were now paying for their utilities without lining up at a payment window.
As shops, offices and public transport shut down this week, Indians scrambled to reach out to order groceries from Big Basket and Grofers. Even Gurgaon Police had to allow e-commerce delivery men to operate during the lockdown. Delhi Police also tweeted to inform that it has allowed several e-commerce retailers “to operate as part of essential services”.
For a moment, imagine the coronavirus epidemic lockdown in the pre-2016 cash economy.
Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman announced relief for the poor – Rs 1.7 lakh crore Gareeb Kalyan package – through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) and Public Distribution System (PDS). This is where the big push for Aadhaar-linked bank accounts and crores of Jan Dhan accounts will be useful for welfare schemes like these. Advocates of Aadhaar always meant for it to work as a direct pipeline of welfare money for the poor.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
As India now grapples with a rapidly spreading coronavirus, these demonetisation-induced shifts have not only allowed the Modi government to initiate a near-total lockdown with relatively minor hiccups but have also aided its financial stimulus directed at the poor.
Also read: Deposits after demonetisation rose by Rs 6 trillion and yet bank credit fell, study shows
A study conducted at National University of Singapore (NUS) Business School shows how the usage of debit cards, digital wallets, and cashless transactions saw a massive spike after demonetisation.
According to the study, debit card usage went up by 84 per cent after demonetisation. Moreover, the number of transactions for infrequent users went up by 400 per cent and the value of their transactions by 150 per cent.
Similarly, the usage of digital wallets in peer-to-peer transfers and e-shopping went up by 745 and 405 per cent, respectively. And among only Indian marketplaces such as Amazon and Flipkart, the value and volume of transactions both went up by 93 and 84 per cent.
Most importantly, even a significant period after demonetisation, “usage pattern persists even during the re-monetization period when cash makes a comeback in the economy, indicating the success of demonetization in enabling new digitization technologies to make inroads into consumer payment habits,” the study notes.
Also read: Fake banknotes seized in India doubled after demonetisation, Gujarat topped list: NCRB
As all of India experiences a lockdown, the fact that a sizeable part of the urban population is used to buying its groceries online solves a major logistical hassle. When people can buy their milk and vegetables using a smartphone app – it makes it easier to limit the movement of citizens to the bare-minimum.
More importantly, now that payments and money transfers have moved online, people can pay for essential utilities such as electricity, water, LPG, mobile phone bills, and dish television using digital wallets like Paytm and Google Pay.
This has two major benefits in times of a lockdown. First, citizens no longer need to physically leave their homes to get their phones recharged or pay the electricity bill. Second, a lockdown means shutting down of a large part of India’s commercial activity. But with these companies in operation, the economy keeps somewhat moving.
Also read: Three years after demonetisation, survey finds people still prefer cash payment
None of this is to justify demonetisation, which is by far the biggest Modi folly. An overnight, ill-conceived, egotistic decision left hundreds of thousands of people jobless and paralysed India’s informal economy. But the advocates of demonetisation – or let’s call them the apologists – have always held up digitisation of payments as one of its positive outcomes. Though that goal wasn’t what Modi started with. He said it would end black money. It was a midcourse correction that the government started saying digital is a goal.
Indians learnt the digital payment habit through a trial-by-fire method. Today, that habit will see them through some of the coronavirus lockdown hardship.
Views are personal.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Only those who have gone through delivery excruciating pains will realise the pleasure and jubilations of holding a baby. stop this nonsense of duplication duplicity. I’m done with you.
Only those who have gone through delivery excruciating pains will realise the pleasure and jubilations of holding a baby.
