Bandra migrant crowd: Arnab, Rahul Shivshankar see conspiracy, Sardesai on ‘healing touch’
New Delhi: One would have expected prime time debates to focus on Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s speech Tuesday extending the lockdown to 3 May, but another piece of news took over— hundreds of migrant workers gathered at Mumbai’s Bandra station Tuesday aftern allegedly hearing false news that the government was running trains to transport them back home.
Immediately, news anchors such as Rajat Sharma from India TV, Times Now’s Rahul Shivshanker and Republic’s Arnab Goswami darkly hinted at a “conspiracy”. On News Nation, the channel’s Mumbai correspondent said the crowds gathered outside Bandra station and near a masjid (which was mentioned by most news channels), were carrying no luggage, so how could they be travelling anywhere?
Most channels broadcast Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray’s calming speech. which earned him a pat on the back from India TV — “Acchi baat kahi”, declared the anchor.
On India Today, anchor Rajdeep Sardesai said that two images confronted the country — one of the prime minister announcing the lockdown extension and the other of migrant workers wanting to go home.
Sardesai claimed that what happened in Delhi more than two weeks ago,when migrants crowded bus stations, is now happening in west India, from Surat in Gujarat to Bandra in Mumbai, and even in Telangana. He contrasted the images of Modi, announcing the extension, with those of the  migrant workers in Mumbai. “These two images have dominated headlines,” he said, but added that the big question was why these migrants were so restless and angry — “Is the healing touch missing in lockdown 2.0?”
Congress MP Shashi Tharoor said that his party had been repeatedly warning of this since 24 March. He pointed out that without shelter, source of income or food, how could people expect these migrants, whose employers had shelved their responsibilities towards them, to survive? “Their demand is rational and reasonable, no one should be expected to live without food,” he said.
On Republic TV, Goswami was more aggressive than usual — telling panelists to “listen to him with a capital l” and he even asked political analyst Royden Roach to shut up and not speak over him.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Roach said that the crowd that assembled outside Bandra station yesterday was a mix of migrant workers wanting to go home and other labourers who were concerned about food distribution.
However, Goswami dismissed the gathering as a “pseudo-political protest” and said that fake news headquarters has already written a script about migrant crisis and Maharashtra migrant distress. “They tried it in Delhi, they were exposed,” he declared.
He also questioned how Congress Twitter handles were allegedly “live blogging the event”, saying “I told you so”.
“Look at the smile on Royden’s face, he knows exactly what I’m talking about,” he said to his panelists and viewers.
ANI Editor-in-chief Smita Prakash questioned how people could derive “masochistic pleasure” from what happened in Bandra and live-tweet things, as the gathering was a dangerous “tinder box situation”.
“This is not the time to play dirty politics,” she warned.

On ABP’s ‘Bharat ki Baat’, host Sumit Awasthi was less sympathetic. Showing visuals of the gatherings in both Bandra and Surat, he said that to fight coronavirus, social distancing is very important, but these images show the very opposite.
“In tasveeron ke liye zimadaar kaun hain?” (who is responsible for these images?), he asked.

On ‘The Newshour’ with Times Now, host Navika Kumar took an opportunity to clarify “rumor mongering”. She said that contrary to many reports, the Railway Ministry had confirmed that no decision has been taken to run any Jansadharan Special trains to clear the rush of stranded migrant labour from various locations. “Stay put where you are, follow guidelines, wear masks, wash hands, stay home stay safe,” she advised.
Zee News focused on PM Modi’s speech. On ‘DNA’, anchor Sudhir Chaudhary focused on the seven “vachan” (promises) that Modi asked for.
“Inn mein hi virus ka ilaaj chhupa hua hain” (In these 7 points is hidden the secret cure for coronavirus).
The first two were regular — take care of elders and those who are vulnerable to disease, respect the “lakshman rekha” of lockdown. Third, Modi asked people to build their immunity, and asked them to follow the guidelines set by the Ministry of AYUSH. Fourth and most important, he asked people to download the government’s Aarogya Setu Mobile App. He paused and for a second became an advertisement for the app — “Let us tell you, this is a kamaal ka (wonderful) app. If you download it, you can save yourself from coronavirus”. He reiterated again that downloading the app was a must.
He then resumed the rest of the vachans — take care of the poor, be a good employer by not firing but taking care of your employees, and respect “corona fighters” like nurses, doctors and policemen.
“We can win the war against corona with these 7 steps,” he said triumphantly.

Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Dirty politics is being played again n again.In this hour of crisis is it not our duty to stand with our PM n the Nation.what the hell does opposition think?PM can easily declare Emergency under art.360.I hope wisdom prevails.BHAVATU SARVA MANGALAM.
Indian journalism is in Mess. Corrupt Anchors are bent upon to ruin the nation.
There are journalists in the country who have no knowledge how much a labour earns in this country . The migrant worker work very hard and also live in hardship only to save money for purchasing land and other facilities at their native place and are now behaving irresponsibly and trying to milk the government .
On 14th for the first time I noted that Prime Minister’s speech intrigued me. He completely failed to address the plight of daily wagers. I think Yojana Bhawan is now a stable of donkeys. No policy no plan, no assurance.
Mr Prime Minister it is no good comparing with other nations when you are addressing the nation
Dear Sir
If they where workers & wanted to go home ,
As per Government /others claiming ,
Where where their luggages kept?? ,
In Clock Room of Railways ??
Need to know
Rajdeep , Ravish Kumar, Arfa khanum serwani, Prasun Bajpayee, Swara Aunty, The Print, The Quint, BBC , Al-Jazeera, Sobha de, Kavita Krishan, Nidhi Rajdharm, Anuvav Sinha , sagarika Ghost, never one single Condemnation of the “Super Spreader Tabligi Zamat who’s spreading the Pandemic Vigorously in India they now Fuc** of f in their Mouth. Never written a single line about this . Here in Maharashtra Some NCP and some Congress Muslim leaders are involved in this Gathering in Bandra West Mumbai station
Political Mischief Mongers Backed By Presstitutes Fishing In Troubled Corona Waters Should Be Dealt With Severely By State.
The Print is full of thugs and sent their stooges to some channels to spread venom against India and acquire more funds from abroad.
Hatred towards Modi clearly visible and not the reality in reporting.
The Print is full of thugs who sent their stooges to some channels to spread their venom against India so as to acquire more funds.
I wonder why Arnab call Bjp speakers to his panel , because he represents bjp and. Republic Tv , I think republic tv should now be called Bjp tv , and he has one very intelligent tool in his hand if the argument goes against his way he lessens the volume of the speaker and increases his volume I wonder if he ever gets a sore throat
Bhaktxxxxxuncle can change his name to Afzal Guru any man with common sense can understand that travel to Bandra terminus does not lead from bandra
If we can be saved by Arogya  Setu why lkd and so many other gimmicks by the Prime Moron? We can even export some Setus to Trump!
The Print will surely get highest civilian award from all gulf countries for unbiased reporting
What I learnt from the Print is
1.Masjid / Muslim shouldn’t be used when it is something allegations on them.
2. When Muslims/ Masjids allegedly got attacked it has to be highlighted & direct responsibility is Shri Naredra Modi. 
How long you can sustain with this theory?
Such a LOUSY reputation of this journalist, ibwonder if anyone ever reads all this, knowing your leanings towards soniaamma
