Private schools can’t hike fees, can charge only monthly tuition: Delhi govt
New Delhi: The Delhi government has instructed private schools not to hike their fees in the midst of the Covid-19 lockdown, Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia announced Friday, providing relief to parents.
In its order issued Friday, the government has said schools cannot hike fees without its permission, whether they are constructed on private land or government land. The schools have also been told they can only charge a monthly tuition fee, and not transport fee, development fee or any other form of fee.
The orders have been issued under the Disaster Management Act, which is in place all over the country due to the Covid-19 pandemic.
“We have been getting many complaints that schools are increasing their fee and charging fee like transport fee at this time,” Sisodia said during a press conference.
“Schools are not supposed to collect any other form of fee — annual fee, three months’ fee or transport fee. They can only collect tuition fee and that too on a monthly basis,” he added.
Also read: Schools want summer vacations advanced, we’ll decide after lockdown: CBSE secretary
Many private schools like Sanskriti School, Guru Harkrishan Public School, Apeejay and others had hiked their fee amid the coronavirus pandemic. Parents of children in various Delhi schools complained about the fee hike to the authorities, writing a letter to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and also bringing it to the attention of Human Resource Development Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal ‘Nishank’ through an online petition.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
None of the schools, apart from Sanskriti, had approval from the Directorate of Education (DoE) to hike the fee, sources in the Delhi government told ThePrint. Other schools will need permission to implement the fee hike, which the Delhi government has now said it will not grant until the Covid-19 crisis has passed.
“Most schools took advantage of the fact that a lockdown is in place and offices are shut and just went ahead with the fee hike on their own, without permission from the government,” said a top source in the government.
Sisodia also said schools cannot exclude children from online classes if their fee is not paid.
“We also received complaints about schools excluding children from live classes if their fee has not been paid. There is no need for schools to stoop so low; they are supposed to be doing social work and not making profit. This is why we are also instructing schools that they cannot exclude any student from online classes, whether the fee has been paid or not,” he said.
The schools have also been asked to keep paying staff salaries for the next three months.
“The school shall neither stop payment of monthly salary nor reduce the existing total emolument to the teaching and non-teaching staff of their schools in the name of non-availability of funds,” the order issued by DoE Friday stated.
Also read: Civil servant-parents of Delhi’s elite Sanskriti School want CAG audit after fee hike
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Sir, School charged arrier of school fees hike in 2017 and same not refund till date. School authority says that case is in court. Plz confirm the case is pending in court or otherwise.
My children are studying in General Raj School, Hauz Khas, they are charging fees along with yearly charges and development charges plus they are also charging exam and stationery fees charges and medical charges in lockdown period. They also increase their school fees by 15% in this academic session despite of Delhi Govt. advisory that no school is allowed to increase their school fees in the lockdown period. Kindly look into this matter because this is not possible for me to pay my wards school fees with high fees.
Can you pls provide CBSE circular dtd 17 April 2020 regarding fee
My child studying  in Jaipuriar school cbse board navi mumbai school have increase fees acedmic year 2020-21 and also includes term fees ,gprs charge and social gathering charges….please take some action about fees hike because this time all are facing difficulties. Please suggest what can do?
Sovereign School Rohini Sec 24 is charging development fees along with tution fees
