India registers record jump of 83 deaths and 2,487 Covid-19 cases in 24 hours
New Delhi: India registered a record jump of 83 deaths and 2,487 cases in 24 hours as the number of COVID-19 fatalities rose to 1,306 and total cases climbed to 40,263 on Sunday, according to the Union health ministry.
The number of active COVID-19 cases stood at 28,070, while 10,886 people have recovered and one patient has migrated, it said. The total number of cases also include 111 foreign nationals.
Of the 83 deaths reported since Saturday evening, 36 were from Maharashtra, 26 from Gujarat, 11 from Madhya Pradesh, three each from Rajasthan and Delhi, two from Telangana and one each from Tamil Nadu and Bihar.
With 521 fatalities, Maharashtra accounts for the maximum of the nationwide 1,306 deaths. Gujarat comes second with 262 deaths, followed by Madhya Pradesh 156, Rajasthan 65, Delhi 64, Uttar Pradesh 43, and West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh 33 each.
The death toll reached 29 in Tamil Nadu, 28 in Telangana, while Karnataka has reported 25 fatalities due to the respiratory disease. Punjab has registered 20 COVID-19 deaths, Jammu and Kashmir eight, Kerala, Bihar and Haryana have reported four deaths each. Jharkhand has recorded three COVID-19 fatalities.
Meghalaya, Himachal Pradesh, Odisha and Assam have reported one fatality each, according to the ministry data. The health ministry’s Saturday evening update had put the death toll at 1,223 and the number of cases at 37,776 in the country.
According to the health ministry data updated on Sunday evening, the highest number of confirmed cases in the country is from Maharashtra at 12,296, followed by Gujarat at 5,055, Delhi 4,122, Madhya Pradesh 2,846, Rajasthan 2,772, Tamil Nadu 2,757 and Uttar Pradesh 2,626.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The number of COVID-19 cases has gone up to 1,583 in Andhra Pradesh and 1,063 in Telangana. It has risen to 922 in West Bengal, 772 in Punjab, 666 in Jammu and Kashmir, 606 in Karnataka, 500 in Kerala and 482 in Bihar.
Haryana has reported 394 coronavirus cases, while Odisha has 160 cases. A total of 115 people have been infected with the virus in Jharkhand and 94 in Chandigarh. Uttarakhand has reported 59 cases, Assam and Chhattisgarh have 43 cases each, while Himachal Pradesh and Ladakh have registered 40 cases so far.
Thirty-three COVID-19 cases have been reported from the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Meghalaya has reported 12 cases, Puducherry eight, while Goa has seven COVID-19 cases.
Tripura has registered four cases, while Manipur has two cases. Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh have reported a case each.
The ministry said, “139 cases are being assigned to states for contact tracing.”
“Our figures are being reconciled with the ICMR,” it said on its website, adding state-wise distribution is subject to further verification and reconciliation.
However, a PTI tally of figures reported by states directly showed at least 1,328 deaths across the country while the number of confirmed cases of infection had reached 40,440 as on Sunday evening. Of them, 10,661 have been cured and discharged.
There has been a lag in the Union Health Ministry figures, compared to the aggregate of numbers announced by different states, which officials attribute to procedural delays in assigning the cases to individual states.
Also read: Lucknow Covid hotspots named after mosques, Yogi govt draws flak for ‘communalising’ illness
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
The Doom of the Indian COVID
The Indian nation is doomed – forever – and they have no clue -but they deserve it. dindooo hindoo
Doom No.1
There are 10 million Indians,who clean toilets in the GCC/UK/EU/USA/Africa – and their employers,WILL kick them out.They are already laid off.
Their host nations want them to be kicked out – as the host nations want these virus holes,OUT – and they also want to lower their burden on the health and other infra of their nation.GCC imports almost all the food – and,if the logistics supply chain is hit,in wave 2 or 3 – there will be a disaster.The Arabs do not want,to feed the kaffirs.
These 10 million crap holes – WILL return to India – as the cost of living in India,is cheaper – BUT the Indian state,does NOT want them.They are infected,useless,a deadweight and the Indian state,has to quarantine these 10 million vermin.In addition,they have to be airlifed,free of cost !
Where will the Indian state keep these 10 million – who may be asymptos – and how can you test,so many vermin – and where will they be quarantined ? Will they be tested before airlift – and then,will the host nation – keep them ?
Doom No.2
The Indian clowns,are doing 30000 tests a day – in a nation of 1.2 billion ! These are the PCR tests,for the RNA – we hope.Y ? The PRC 1st leaked the virus and then the PRC did not supply the testing kits to the Indians ! The truth is that the pathetic nation of India – has no testing kits for mass testing – not even the anti-body kits.
What will be the fate of this pathetic nation – if there is a bio terror attack ?
The Indian state lies that the tests are done,for relevant cases – the truth is that they do not have testing capacity.The PRC plan,is the “thousand cuts” – path.The purpose of denying testing kits – is to allow the spread of the virus – across the Indian Nation – for the resurgence, of the 2nd and 3 rd wave,in India,in the monsoons and beyond – and complete destruction of the Indian Banking and Industry.
No mass testing or survey tests,have been done,by the Indian state !
Doom No.3
In India – at least 30000 Indian worms,die in a day.Why is the death rate of COVID in India,less than 100 ? The scam of the billenium.No Indian is dying,in the normal course due – which is accelerated,or catalysed by COVID ?
Could it be that the diseased and aged – who are dying,in the 30000s – are immune to COVID ? Caramba ! The Truth is that the Indian state,HAS NOT CHECKED the dead,in morgues,to see,if they are infected.That is fine – as they are dead – but then,the 100000s infected,by the dead,are roaming free.
In the COVID period – the normative death rate ,will in any case,spike upwards
Doom No.4
When the daily infections and kill ratio,is rising – the Indian state has opened the economy ! It is now too late ! SME are wiped out for ever. SME are the supply chain for large industry – so large industry is wiped out ! Indian large industry is dependent on imports – and the
exporter nations are shut ! Some Indian Industries are export led – and the importers are kapoot ! Those industries who sell in India – are facing supply chain shortages,lack of purchasing power and demand,inability to offer credit – and soon,destruction of logistics !
