Tablighi attendees ‘creating trouble’ at hospitals, Delhi govt asks for more police vigil
New Delhi: Several suspected and positive coronavirus patients, especially those who had attended the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in Delhi’s Nizamuddin area last month, have been allegedly creating trouble in hospitals and quarantine facilities, where they were shifted Tuesday.
Delhi Health Secretary Padmini Singla Thursday wrote to Delhi Police Commissioner S.N. Shrivastava, asking for more reinforcements at the hospitals and quarantine centres where the Jamaat event attendees have been kept. 
This comes a day after it was reported that some attendees “misbehaved” and “spat” on doctors and healthcare personnel at a railway quarantine facility in southeast Delhi’s Tughlakabad. But the situation is now under control after the intervention of police and CRPF personnel.
Singhla’s letter, which has been accessed by ThePrint, said several patients, “particularly those transferred” from the Nizamuddin Markaz mosque, where the congregation took place, are creating a “law and order problem and commotion in hospitals and quarantine centres”.
It has become difficult for the hospital staff to handle the situation, said Singla in the letter.
The letter didn’t elaborate on the nature of the law and order problem, but Delhi government sources told ThePrint the the Jamaat event attendees were not cooperating with the hospital and medical staff, they were refusing to get tested and were misbehaving with the healthcare personnel.
Sources in the government said these people had misbehaving with the staff at Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narayan Hospital and Rajiv Gandhi Super Speciality Hospital, which are two of the several hospitals designated to treat Covid-19 patients in Delhi.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Among the isolation centres, where the Jamaat members have been allegedly creating trouble are the Tughlakabad railway quarantine facility and another in Narela, sources added.
The matter was also raised Thursday during a meeting between Delhi Health Minister Satyender Jain and medical superintendents of the various Covid-19 hospitals.
On Wednesday, at least 2,361 people were evacuated from the mosque after 24 from the area tested positive for coronavirus Tuesday evening.
This large-scale evacuation at the Tablighi Jamaat headquarters took over 36 hours, and came after several people died from Covid-19 after attending the Delhi event from 13-15 March.
Also read: Coronavirus was a test of secular nationalism. Then Tablighi Jamaat became the scapegoat
Mandeep Singh, PRO of Delhi Police, said: “Police personnel have been deployed at all these (isolation) centres and more will be deployed if need be.”
He added the police are constantly in touch with the government officials in this regard.
Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal has also been receiving calls from health workers in this connection. He had mentioned it during the digital press conferences he held Wednesday and Thursday.
Meanwhile, situation at the Tughlakabad facility, where some Jamaat members allegedly misbehaved and spat on doctors, has settled down.
“We had to call the police where the Tablighi Jamaat attendees have been quarantined because they were not cooperating with us and misbehaving with us,” Northern Railway spokesperson Deepak Kumar told ThePrint. “But after the CRPF and the Delhi Police were called, things have settled down.”
Since the situation has now settled down, Kumar said it is important that the issue is not raised in a way that it disrupts the communal harmony.
“We (the Railways) want to ensure that there are no infections and the social fabric of the society is maintained.”
In a statement issued Wednesday, Kumar said: “At the quarantine centre, they (attendees) misbehaved with the staff and even raised objections over the food being served to them… They even spat at the doctors and those attending to them and refused to stop roaming around the quarantine facilities.”
“We informed the DM (district magistrate) South East Delhi to arrange necessary security to control them or to shift them to any other suitable place. At 5.30 pm, four Delhi Police constables and six CRPF jawans along with a PCR van have been deployed at the quarantine centres,” he said.
Of the over 2,000 attendees, about 167 are currently housed in this makeshift quarantine centre set up on the Railway’s property.
The health authorities Thursday confirmed that nearly 400 Covid-19 patients in the country have a Tablighi Jamaat connection. With nearly 2,000 positive cases, one in India’s five confirmed coronavirus patients is linked to the Sunni organisation.
Also read: This is how police in states are tracking people who attended Tablighi event in Delhi
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
These papers always tell lie pls put your mind if so you have why is being happen means this Tableegi trend now and because the sarkar hide his fault because we have first case in January 29 and we our lockdown starts from 22 March why so much wait and when tableegi meeting happen 13 to 15 our health organisation said on 13 March Chinta ki koi baat nahy hai or immediately they lockdown whole country why? This question mark ask if you have mind if don’t lage rahe ek community ke peeche…..
These papers always tell lie always dont think only read the papers pls put your mind if so you have why is being happen means this Tableegi trend now and because the sarkar hide his fault because we have first case in January 29 and we our lockdown starts from 22 March why so much wait and when tableegi meeting happen 13 to 15 our health organisation said on 13 March Chinta ki koi baat nahy hai or immediately they lockdown whole country why? This question mark ask if you have mind if don’t lage rahe ek community ke peeche…..
Its called divine providence. If it happens, it was meant to happen.
A virus equipped terrorist is cheaper than a bomb belted one
Expecting inhumans to act like humans is stupidity
Why area railway cargo wagons not being configured for use as temporary prisons and isolation Cells . ??? Surely the need to control These elements is even more important than mobile hospitals.  Spitting on healthcare workers is abhorrent . Such folks should be locked in railway animal wagon with meds, water and  dry foods and left there for 2 weeks
These people do not deserve mercy or any medical attendance. Knowing the epidemic consequences they held the religious meet without having sense of postponement the event for atleast two or three month period. The NSA’s intervention is also not desirable and they let out those people without any Lathi Charge. We witnessed such Lathi Charge treatment for those who were attending the Friday prayers on 27th March 2020 in a Mosque in Karnataka.
Put all of the behind bar or in a private hall &  do not provide medical facilities let them suffer till their Sulemani  kidda die
Jhoot bolo.. phir jhoot bolo.. baar baar jhoot bole…
Sab changasi
Lock Them Down Depriving Medical Facilities For The Rest Of Their Lives.
AAP government wants to keep ahead of BJP in political race.
@ Asim Ali, @ Hilal Ahmed, @ Sumaira Rizvi 
Please explain and defend these behavior.
Or is it right wing or Hindu nationalist conspiracy.
THESE ARE THE INTERNATIONAL “ISIS JIHADI VIRUS SUICIDE BOMBErs” INVITED BY INDIA JIHADIS WHO ARE OPENLY CHALLENGING INDIAN CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITIES SINCE PROTECTORS UNEXPECTEDLY LOST POWER! AND LOST ON THEIR HOPE OF DISINTEGRATING INDIA.
IT IS TIME TO DESTROY & ROOT THEM OUT FOR EVER AT ANY COST BEFORE THEY CAUSE PROLONGED MAYHEM
