Coronavirus cases rise to 81 in India, govt says COVID-19 not a health emergency
New Delhi: The number of novel coronavirus cases on Friday rose to 81, which include 16 Italians and one Canadian, Health Ministry officials said.
Addressing reporters, Health Ministry Joint Secretary Lav Agarwal said coronavirus is not a health emergency and that there is no need to panic.
He said seven more coronavirus patients have been cured and they will be discharged soon, while 71 are “clinically stable”.
He said so far, India has evacuated 1,031 people, including from Maldives, US, Madagascar and China.
“An exercise will be undertaken on Saturday to bring back Indian passengers stranded in Iran. Air India will also send a flight to Milan on Saturday to bring back stranded Indians. It will land on Sunday morning at Delhi airport,” said Ministry of Civil Aviation Joint Secretary Rubina Ali.
Also read: Mass tests are vital to contain coronavirus spread in India, experts say after first death
A total of 4,000 people who came in contact with 81 positive cases are under vigorous observation across the country, Agarwal said.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Meanwhile, 124 evacuees from Japan, 112 evacuees from China are being discharged from Friday onwards after testing negative for COVID-19, Agarwal said.
The Centre also decided to allow international traffic only through 19 border checkposts out of 37 and decided to continue suspension of Indo-Bangladesh cross border passenger trains and buses till April 15, or earlier, if so decided.
With the World Health Organisation declaring coronavirus a pandemic, Agarwal said 42,000 people across the country are under community surveillance.
The coronavirus outbreak has led to more than 4,000 deaths globally.
The government on Wednesday suspended all visas, barring a few categories like diplomatic and employment, in an attempt to prevent the spread of coronavirus.
