No fixed list, decide what food & groceries you want exempt from lockdown, MHA tells states
New Delhi: The Union Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) Friday issued a fresh notification that allows state governments to decide the food and groceries they want exempt from the ongoing Covid-19 lockdown.
Food and groceries are among a bouquet of essentials that are exempt from the nationwide lockdown in place since last week. The new order, which is meant to ease supplies, also permits states to authorise organisations with nationwide supply chains to issue regional passes for critical local staff.
“Queries have been received as to what constitutes food and grocery. Since it is neither feasible nor desirable to mention each item of food and grocery in the guidelines, the States/UT Governments are advised to interpret these terms to mean all items of food and grocery that are usually consumed by people on day-to-day basis,” the MHA said in the order.
The order also noted the difficulties that exempt businesses with nationwide supply chains were facing in ensuring the free movement of staff. To this end, the ministry has asked state governments to issue “authorisation letters to companies/organisations having nationwide supply chains of essential goods, allowing them to issue regional passes for easy movement of critical staff and workers in order to maintain their national supply chains”.
Also Read: Why ‘family elder’ Modi, and not aggressive Amit Shah, is govt’s face in Covid-19 fight
Highly placed sources in the government said the lockdown imposed on 25 March had disrupted the supply chain of essential goods, thus prompting the fresh move.
“Essentially, the idea is to leave it to states to decide what falls under the essential category. The lockdown will continue, but a substantial easing of restrictions will be done to ease the supply chain,” said a senior government official who did not wish to be identified.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Among other things, the order also empowers the authorities under railways, ports and airports to issue passes for “critical mass of staff and contractual labour” essential to cargo movement as well as relief and evacuation efforts.
The home ministry has also decided to allow inter-state and intra-state movement of trucks and other goods vehicles with one “additional person”, along with the driver, as long as the latter is carrying a valid driver’s licence.
“Movement of driver and one person from their place of residence to truck should also be facilitated by local authorities,” the order stated, adding that all such movement will have to adhere to hygiene and social distancing norms.
Also Read: This is how Odisha quarantined me after I returned from Harvard. Other states should learn
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
