‘We’ll get through this’: Bengaluru cop sings Hum Honge Kamyab to make people stay indoors
Bengaluru: In the fight against the spread of coronavirus, one of the toughest tasks that the police have is convincing people to stay indoors during the national lockdown. This has led them to come up with innovative ways to connect with the public — just like Assistant Commissioner of Police Bengaluru, Tabarak Fathima who found a mellifluous way of urging people to stay home.
The Bengaluru Police seem to find a special place in the hearts of people as they sing their way in.
During the peak of the anti-CAA protests in the city, a video of Deputy Commissioner of Police (Central) Chethan Singh Rathore singing the national anthem, requesting people to remain united won hearts on the Internet. Now, a viral video of Fathima singing to create awareness on how to combat coronavirus has gone viral on social media.

 
 Earworm alert! Our ACP Tabarak Fathima gave a new twist to the song we all know so well. See how easy it is to stay safe? #ArrestCorona
A post shared by  Bengaluru City Police (@blrcitypolice) on Mar 24, 2020 at 7:44am PDT

In the video, Fathima is seen speaking to people using a public address system in Bengaluru’s Pulakeshinagar, advising them to stay indoors to ensure that the spread of coronavirus is curtailed.
After speaking for a few minutes on the importance of keeping oneself sanitised, not indulging in panic buying as all essential services will be available, Fathima reiterates several times on the need to remain strong as a community and not panic during this pandemic.
She then asks people to join her as she sings ‘Hum Honge Kamyab’…but with a little twist with new lyrics- “We shall stay at home, we shall sanitise and we shall wear face masks every day”…..we shall overcome one day. Hum Honge Kamyab ek din”.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Speaking to The Print, Fathima said it was important that people understand that the police force is not about using the lathi (stick) and trying to bring order, they are also there to support and help society.
“If you see any violation of section 144, advise people to go back home. If you see people who are home quarantined outside, please request them to go inside immediately. Please do not share panic or fear. We should all come together and we will get through this,” she is heard saying in the video.
Fathima was one of the police officers chosen to train the department to improve their image and project themselves in a friendly manner. She said that there is a notion that policemen on the ground are always angry and grumpy. Their endeavour is to change this perception.
Also read: ‘Section 144 order’ stokes confusion in Mumbai amid COVID-19 scare, but it’s not for public
She has been visiting several areas within her jurisdiction and making announcements to cheer people and ensure that they understand why the lockdown is necessary.
“I don’t keep count of how many places I visit per day, but I am trying to cover as many places as possible and educate people,“ she said.
Fathima along with several other officers have been displaying their compassionate side during this time of crisis. This was also reiterated by pictures posted by the Bengaluru police showing the police officials distributing food to homeless people on the streets. The caption read – “Crackdown on criminals, or be compassionate? We can do both. While the city is on a lockdown owing to recent events, we are doing our bit. #Janasnehipolice #ArrestCorona.”
 
 
Crackdown on criminals, or be compassionate? We can do both. While the city is on a lockdown owing to recent events, we are doing our bit. #Janasnehipolice #ArrestCorona
A post shared by  Bengaluru City Police (@blrcitypolice) on Mar 24, 2020 at 3:10am PDT
