Haryana claims it has screened entire population for flu symptoms, says situation not alarming
Chandigarh: The Haryana government has completed screening its entire population for flu-like symptoms, following a 10-day exercise that involved more than 20,000 teams of officials.
Amid a spike in the number of coronavirus cases in the state, Haryana had launched a door-to-door screening campaign on 10 April. Teams of village-level ASHA workers, along with auxiliary nursing midwives and, in many villages, anganwadi workers were asked to visit every household and gather details of anyone having flu-like symptoms. The exercise was completed on 20 April.
Haryana’s additional chief secretary (health), Rajiv Arora, told ThePrint that the data gathered is being analysed, and while the exact number of people suffering from flu-like symptoms is yet to be assessed, the situation emerging out of the exercise is “not alarming” and “quite handleable”.
Arora said persons showing symptoms are being monitored and will be tested. “We have already procured 35,000 rapid test kits, of which 10,000 have been procured from ICMR, and the rest are from a company that manufactures these kits in Manesar,” he said.
“When ICMR gives its clearance for the use of rapid test kits, we will start testing everyone with flu-like symptoms,” Arora said.
Also read: At Haryana epicentre Nuh, officials fighting virus with help from Muslim priests, panchayats
Haryana has so far reported 250 Covid-19 cases and two deaths, and this number does not include the 14 Italian nationals who tested positive for the infection in Gurugram.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Four fresh cases each from Gurugram and Sonepat and one from Ambala were reported Wednesday.
The total number of people tested for the coronavirus in the state is now over 15,500, putting it near the top of the list of states that have ramped up testing.
The number of labs conducting these tests has increased from two to seven in the last two weeks. These are PGIMS, Rohtak (capacity 180 samples per day); BPS Khanpur Kalan (120 samples per day); ESIC Medical College, Faridabad (100 samples per day); Kalpana Chawla Medical College, Karnal (120 samples per day); NRCE, Hisar (25 samples per day); PGIMER, Chandigarh (50 samples per day); and CSIR, Mohali (50 samples per day).
Another five private labs in Gurugram have been given the nod for Covid-19 testing.
Also read: ICMR advises ‘pool testing’ in low-infection areas to increase number of Covid-19 tests
Arora said testing of pooled samples has begun, which will enhance capacities substantially. “We are not pooling more than three samples,” he said.
“We are now using the information gathered through the Aarogya Setu mobile app for monitoring people with flu-like symptoms. The app asks the user to self-declare his or her symptoms,” he informed.
“There is a dedicated officer and his team who are monitoring the app users. Initially, a lot of people downloaded the app and thought it was like a game, but soon realised the significance of the information. Those who register symptoms in the app are contacted and monitored, and if required, will also be sampled,” said Arora.
More than 29.95 lakh persons have already downloaded the app in Haryana, he added.
Also read: Haryana doubles salaries of healthcare officials and workers fighting Covid-19
Rajiv Arora added that while rural areas across the state had been covered through door-to-door checking, mobile OPD check-up vans were stationed in shifts in urban areas and the residents informed about their timings and location. “We have reports that at some places in Gurugram this was not allowed to come into the residential complexes for which also we are finding a solution,” said Arora.
Dr J. S. Punia, civil surgeon Gurugram told ThePrint that lakhs of people in the city had already been tested through the door-to-door survey.
“Our mobile OPD vans are going from colony to colony informing the residents of their timings and location. The second round of the checks has also started and anyone who has been left uncovered in the first round will be checked. Residents are advised to keep a tab on the location and timings of our mobile OPD vans and co-operate with our teams,” he added.
Also read: Chewing gum ban good but Haryana’s hookah culture can be real Covid-19 culprit
Arora said in order to provide health facilities to those suffering from other problems, more than 400 mobile health teams are functional.
“These mobile health check-up buses also report any severe respiratory disorder, as also flu-like symptoms in the people they check every day,” he said.
He added that apart from the people who were showing flu-like symptoms, the government has decided to also start sampling those working in high-risk conditions. These include doctors, nurses, other hospital staff, sanitation workers and policemen.
The state has already carried out sampling and testing of the susceptible population in containment zones in various districts, including Nuh, Palwal, Sonepat, Karnal, Faridabad, Bhiwani, Ambala and Gurugram.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
