Day before trains restart, many CMs urge PM Modi not to restore services until 31 May
New Delhi: The chief ministers of several states, including Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal, have urged Prime Minister Narendra Modi not to restart train services as planned from Tuesday, owing to continuing fears over the spread of Covid-19.
The fifth video conference meeting between PM Modi and the CMs since the lockdown began in March witnessed a split between the central government and some states, largely ruled by opposition parties, over India’s exit strategy from the 48-day lockdown, with Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee alleging that the Centre was politically targeting her state.
Tamil Nadu CM Edappadi Palaniswami spoke against the resumption of railway services by pointing to the rising number of cases in Chennai.
Kerala CM Pinarayi Vijayan said states should be allowed to decide on whether public transport should be allowed to run.
Chhattisgarh CM Bhupesh Baghel and Punjab’s Captain Amarinder Singh, both of the Congress, agreed with Vijayan about public transport, and added that states should also be given the discretion to not only decide the categorisation of zones into red, orange and green, but also the kind of economic activities to permit.
According to a source, Banerjee told the PM: “You have to maintain the federal structure. The Centre cannot make decisions and merely inform states. States must be given independence regarding handling of lockdown because states understand the situation on the ground better.”
Also read: Modi govt tells ministries to be careful in releasing money to states for central schemes
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Setting the stage for an exit strategy from the lockdown, which is currently slated to end on 17 May, PM Modi told the CMs that in the coming days, economic activities that have slowly resumed in several parts of the country will pick up steam.
“We must realise that the fight against Covid-19 has to be more focused now. We have to devise and implement a balanced strategy regarding the road ahead and challenges we face,” Modi said, according to a statement released by the government.
The PM also said that the government now has a reasonably clear indication about the geographical spread of the pandemic in India, including the worst-affected areas.
“Going forward, the road ahead should be focused on reducing the spread and ensuring that all precautions are taken by people including social distancing norms by observing ‘do gaj doori’,” Modi said, according to the statement.
The PM told the CMs that a considered decision on the government’s strategy beyond 17 May would be taken after going through the various suggestions given by them.
Chief ministers of at least five states recommended the extension of the lockdown until 31 May.
Punjab CM Amarinder Singh recommended a two-week extension of the lockdown, but said it should be based on a carefully crafted strategy, backed by fiscal and economic empowerment of the states.
Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray advised caution while taking any decision on the lockdown.
“Cases are expected to peak in May; they may peak in June or July also. I’ve read Wuhan is witnessing a second wave of cases; even WHO has warned about this,” Thackeray said.
Assam CM Sarbananda Sonowal also sought a two-week extension of the lockdown.
Several CMs also reiterated their earlier demands for a fiscal package from the central government, and raised the issue of migrant labourers, saying the biggest challenge is to provide livelihoods to those who have returned to their home states.
India imposed one of the strictest lockdowns in the world on 25 March, with exemptions given to just a handful of essential services. However, a battered economy forced the government to change its strategy and gradually ease restrictions on movement of goods and services in a calibrated way in the next two phases, beginning 15 April and 4 May.
Also read: Modi govt promised free pulses to 20 crore, only 18% have got them so far
 
