Special trains to move Army troops to sensitive northern, eastern command in lockdown
New Delhi: Two special military trains will run this week to meet Army’s operational requirements at the northern and the eastern command amid the lockdown.
Sources told ThePrint that five trains had initially been requested to facilitate troop movement. They added that pan-India routes were being worked out based on the number of troops travelling from various locations.
Of the two trains sanctioned, one will begin operations from Friday and head to Jammu from Bengaluru. The train will run through Belgaum, Secunderabad and Ambala.
The second train leaves Saturday from Bengaluru and will head to Guwahati through Belgaum, Secunderabad, Gopalpur, and Howrah and New Jalpaiguri Station in West Bengal.
Army sources said these two trains will enable decongestion of the Category A and B training establishments at Bengaluru, Belgaum, Secunderabad and Gopalpur as well as assist in operational preparedness of active formations deployed at the northern and eastern borders.
The defence service typically sees a constant movement of lakhs of troops across the country who are returning from or going on training or leave. The Army usually requests for military special trains when units move from one location to the other, either on deployment or training.
The Army is also considering moving key appointments back to sensitive locations, who would be given special permissions to travel either by road or special aircraft. Sources said the Army is also looking into charter flight options to move troops from Delhi and Chandigarh.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: Army tells units to observe ‘no movement’ amid lockdown, graded relaxation from 20 April
At any given time, about 25 per cent of the 13 lakh-strong Indian Army is on staggered leave and thousands are on training, explained a senior Army officer. To manage the load on the transport infrastructure, reporting days vary, the officer added.
However, when the lockdown was announced on 24 March, all troop movement was suspended in view of the quickly spreading disease. When the lockdown is lifted, there will be a rush of troops reporting back to their bases.
“As the lockdown would be phased out, about two to two-and-a-half lakh troops on leave would be coming back to join their bases around the same time from across the country,” the senior officer said.
He said ensuring special trains for the troops will make sure other trains do not get overcrowded while also cutting down on the troops mingling with the crowd, and thus preventing any possible transmission, the officer added.
An earlier Army advisory stated that troops will report to their nearest military station in case transport is not available. The Army is now contemplating having troops screened and accordingly quarantined before being deployed to their respective units to ensure the disease doesn’t spread, said a second Army officer.
Only personnel due to rejoin units deployed in northern and eastern borders who have undergone mandatory quarantine period and are found medically fit will be accommodated on the special trains, sources said.
Also read: Indian Army has disinfectant drone, UV gun that kills virus in seconds in its Covid arsenal
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
