German daily sends $165 bn bill to China as Covid-19 damages, Beijing calls it ‘xenophobia’
New Delhi: One of Germany’s largest newspapers, Bild, has made out an unusual invoice. The daily has billed China for the money it “owed” Berlin in ‘coronavirus damages’.
In an article titled ‘What China owes us’, that was published Wednesday, the newspaper slapped China with a bill of 150 billion euros, which is $165 billion, for damages inflicted on Germany due to the Covid-19 outbreak that began in Wuhan.
It listed a 27 billion euro charge for losses in German tourism, around 7.2 billion euros for losses to the country’s film industry, 50 billion euros for small businesses and a million euros per hour in costs lost to Lufthansa — a German airline.
Responding to the article, the Chinese Embassy in Berlin said it “stirs up nationalism, prejudice, xenophobia, and hostility to China”.
In a reply to the Chinese embassy’s claims, Bild’s editor-in- chief Julian Reichelt addressed President Xi Jinping in a three-minute-long video and said the latter was endangering the world.
“You, your government and your scientists had to know long ago that coronavirus is highly infectious, but you left the world in the dark about it. Your top experts didn’t respond when Western researchers asked to know what was going on in Wuhan. You were too proud and too nationalistic to tell the truth, which you felt was a national disgrace,” said Reichelt.
He also spoke about China’s “surveillance systems” and its “denial of freedom”.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: China wants India to revise new ‘discriminatory’ FDI policy, says it violates WTO norms
The German newspaper isn’t the only one to have blamed China for the pandemic that has now infected more than 2.4 million people across and claimed over one lakh lives globally.
The US has been at the forefront of countries holding China responsible for the pandemic.
In an interview on 13 April, Reichelt had asked US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo if China should be held accountable for the global pandemic. To this, Pompeo said it was important to understand how and where the virus began, to ensure that something like this never happens again.
When asked if China should pay for the “damage done”, Pompeo replied saying there will be time for recriminations but the current focus was on reducing the risk of the virus.
“For the moment, I think it’s absolutely essential that we focus on the task ahead of us, getting systems in place such that we can reopen the American economy, and ultimately the global economy as well. There’ll be a time for recriminations,” said Pompeo.
At a press conference last week, US President Donald Trump had also said that America was looking into reports on how the novel coronavirus “escaped” from a lab in Wuhan.
“We’re looking at it, a lot of people are looking at it. It seems to make sense. A lot of strange things are happening, but there is a lot of investigation going on and we are going to find out,” Trump said. “All I can say is wherever it came from, came from China in whatever form, 184 countries now are suffering because of it.”
Also read: Global unrest due to Covid-19 lockdown indicates steep rise in poverty and inequality
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
china has to pay for it
thats all
