‘Act responsibly’: Muslim IAS-IPS officers’ plea to community after Tablighi Jamaat episode
Muslim IAS-IPS officers’ Covid-19 appeal to community: Don’t give anyone reason to blame you
Nearly 80 serving and retired IAS, IPS and IFS officers belonging to the Islamic faith appealed to the Muslim community to adhere to social distancing norms, and not give anyone any opportunity to accuse it of spreading Covid-19, reports Sanya Dhingra.
Indians are fighting against coronavirus and BJP IT cell is fighting against Indians
In the midst of the Narendra Modi government’s war-like preparations to fight the coronavirus pandemic, the BJP’s IT cell continues to engage in spreading hate and misinformation. It seems that the IT cell has vowed to become an enemy of its own party and the country, writes Jyoti Yadav.
Govt places order for 10 crore hydroxychloroquine tablets with Ipca labs and Zydus Cadila
Ipca Laboratories and Zydus Cadila, India’s largest manufacturers of anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), have bagged orders from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to supply around 10 crore tablets of the medicine. The central government placed the order after ICMR recommended hydroxychloroquine as a preventive medication for Covid-19 high risk group, reports Himani Chandna.
The four stages of Covid-19 transmission & why India maintains it is not yet in stage 3
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Community transmission occurs when a disease is contracted from the community and the source of the virus remains untraceable. Evidence for community transmission is found through testing patients, who are admitted for respiratory issues and not Covid-19 directly. The samples from patients tested for community transmission have remained low enough for authorities to assert that India is still not in Stage-3, explains Sandhya Ramesh.
Coronavirus is Pakistan’s debt for lifelong rejection of Darwin
Imran Khan, in an 2002 article, blamed the West’s follies upon, “Philosophers like Darwin, who with his half-baked theory of evolution had supposedly disproved the creation of men and hence religion, were read and revered.” But with the corona apocalypse looming ahead, every hope for dealing with today’s rogue virus rests squarely upon Darwin’s 200-year-old discovery of the principle of natural selection, writes Pervez Hoodbhoy.
What if coronavirus crisis had hit India under Manmohan Singh, not Modi
Manmohan Singh was a quiet power — driven by institutions and systems — and Narendra Modi is visible and vocal, powered by his own personality. Both leaders bring unique strengths to tackle coronavirus, writes Kaveree Bamzai.
