FIR against Kanika Kapoor wrongly says she tested positive for COVID-19 at Lucknow airport
Lucknow: The FIR lodged against Bollywood singer Kanika Kapoor, who had attended parties after returning from London and tested positive for coronavirus, has several discrepancies, which point to negligence of health officials.
The FIR, a copy of which has been accessed by ThePrint, wrongly says Kapoor arrived in Lucknow on 14 March.
The ‘Baby doll’ fame singer had arrived in the Uttar Pradesh capital on 11 March.

 
 Hello everyone, For the past 4 days I have had signs of flu, I got myself tested and it came positive for Covid-19.  My family and I are in complete quarantine now and following medical advice on how to move forward. Contact mapping of people I have been in touch with is underway aswell.  I was scanned at the airport as per normal procedure 10days ago when I came back home, the symptoms have developed only 4 days ago. At this stage I would like to urge you all to practice self isolation and get tested if you have the signs.  I am feeling ok, like a normal flu and a mild fever, however we need to be sensible citizens at this time and think of all around us. We can get through this without panic only if we listen to the experts and our local, state and central government directives. Wishing everyone good health.  Jai Hind ! Take care,  KK
A post shared by  Kanika Kapoor (@kanik4kapoor) on Mar 20, 2020 at 1:22am PDT

The FIR, lodged at Sarojini Nagar police station, also wrongly mentioned that Kapoor tested positive for COVID-19 at the Lucknow airport.
Airport authorities said there is no direct flight between Lucknow and London.
“As per information available with us, passenger (Kanika Kapoor) has travelled from London to Mumbai by Air India flight AI130 on 10 March. There is no direct flight from London to Lucknow. It is expected that as per GOI (government of India) orders, screening would have been done in Mumbai. So no comment from Lucknow Airport on this,” said a statement issued by Lucknow airport Friday.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Kapoor was booked for negligence and disobedience to the order issued by a public servant on the complaint of Lucknow Chief Medical Officer (CMO) Narendra Agarwal. 
Talking to ThePrint, Agarwal said there was some “confusion” regarding the information he received. He said he has asked police to update the FIR with correct inputs.
Deputy Commissioner (central), Lucknow, D.K. Singh, said, “Whatever information the CMO has given to us, we have taken it. We are not responsible for such contradictions.”
Also read: ‘Janata curfew’ is a public drill, won’t really stop spread of coronavirus: Experts
After returning from London, Kapoor had attended parties, and many officials and politicians attended them.
Among the politicians who attended one of the parties were BJP’s Lok Sabha MP from Rajasthan Dushyant Singh, who went to Parliament Thursday, and former Rajasthan CM Vasundhara Raje, Singh’s mother.
After Kapoor tested positive, Singh and Raje have gone into self-isolation. On Saturday, both of them tested negative for COVID-19.
Although Kapoor was criticised on social media for her “careless” behaviour, her friends have raised the issue of discrepancies in the FIR.
One of her family friends, who attended a party with Kapoor on 14 March, told ThePrint, the singer had no symptoms until 14  March, but the FIR stated she tested positive for COVID-19 at the airport.
“This is baseless. I have been in quarantine. We are under surveillance. We are ready for all the tests and supporting the authorities,” added the friend, who didn’t want to be named.
The issue of discrepancies in the FIR were also raised on social media. 
कनिका पर एफआईआर या मजाक?लखनऊ एयरपोर्ट का जिक्र है। जबकि यहां यूके से कोई सीधी उड़ान नहीं है।जांच सिर्फ अंतरराष्ट्रीय टर्मिनल पर हो रही है। फिर घरेलू टर्मिनल पर सिर्फ कनिका के लिए क्या अलग से जांच हुई थी? जांच में 24 घण्टे लगते हैं, 2 मिनट में कैसे मिल गयी रिपोर्ट?@Uppolice pic.twitter.com/aaSjBOgjw4
— Gyan Prakash Mishra (@Gyan_p_mishra) March 20, 2020

Following the controversy over the FIR, Lucknow Police Commissioner Sujeet Pandey issued a statement Saturday, stating the report by the CMO against Kapoor “inadvertently” mentions her date of arrival as 14 March. 
“It is actually 11 March. The police, during investigation, will correct this factual part,” according to the statement.
According to the singer’s father Rajiv Kapoor, she had attended 3-4 parties between 13-15 March. Nearly 300 people have attended these parties. 
ThePrint has learnt that on 13 and 14 March, two parties were organised by the nephew of former MP Akbar Ahmad Dumpy and on 15 March, another party was hosted by Congress leader Jitin Prasad’s father-in law Adesh Seth.
In one of the three days, a Holi party was hosted by UP’s Lokayukta, Justice (retd) Sanjay Mishra.
Kapoor had attended all these parties.
State officials also said she travelled to a relative’s place in Kanpur on 13 March.
Jitin Prasada, who had attended the 15 March party with the singer, told ThePrint, he has quarantined himself at his ancestral house in Shahjahanpur. He had attended the party with his family.
District Magistrate Lucknow Abhishek Prakash has ordered for closure of Taj Mahal hotel in the state capital until further order because the singer had attended a party organised at the hotel.
Also read: European registry of patients to contact tracing app — 5 global developments on COVID-19
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
