Journalist behind story of Dalits eating grass in Varanasi district gets notice
Lucknow: The Varanasi District Magistrate (DM) Kaushal Raj Sharma has sent a showcause notice to a journalist and his editor-in-chief after their local daily carried a report claiming that members of the Musahar community were surviving on grass at a village in the district.
The report, by journalists Vijay Vineet and Manish Mishra, had been published on 26 March in the local daily Janadesh Times, about the plight of residents at Koiripur village in Varanasi district, which falls under Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s constituency, ever since the lockdown was announced Tuesday. It was accompanied by photographs of children eating grass that have since been widely shared on social media.
The notice has now been issued to Vineet and the paper’s Editor-in-Chief Subhash Rai, calling on them to publish a denial of the report. 
In the notice, DM Kaushal Raj Sharma states that he had got the matter investigated by an ADM-level officer and established that the report was fabricated one. He added that the Dalits are not eating grass but ankari dal (wild pulses) that grow along with wheat in the fields. 
Sharma told the local media that the Dalits were eating green gram too, which makes it a nutritious meal. He also said the local daily “sensationalised a trivial issue”. He circulated a photograph of himself and his son with a bundle of the ‘ankari grass’.
This is the second such instance of an UP administration going after a journalist over a story. Last year, an FIR was lodged against a journalist who had exposed flaws in mid-day meal scheme in Mirzapur district.
In conversation with ThePrint, journalist Vijay Vineet stood by his report. 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“I have all the photos and videos related to the report, which I have sent to the DM. The condition of Musahars in Koiripur village has been very poor for the last three to four days,” Vineet said. “Due to the lockdown they are unable to go anywhere and have no money either.”
He said that the Musahars showed him the empty utensils in their homes of which he has videos. He claimed that the report had created an impact as the local administration reached the village on the same day and quickly arranged food for the Musahar families. Villagers from the nearby villages have also started helping them, he said. .
Also read: Meet the Pune woman behind the first Indian Covid-19 testing kits
Congress state president Ajay Lallu has also raised the matter. In a statement,  Lallu criticized the state administration.
“If someone is eating ankari grass, then the Uttar Pradesh government and its administration should be ashamed and DM Kaushal Raj Sharma should immediately apologise for his conduct,” the statement reads.
Also read: OPDs shut, surgeries put off: Private hospitals write to finance minister for emergency fund


Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
When we are, as one nation, fighting against Covid _ 19, please, for the sake of GOD, do not publish silly matter (s) and politicise it.  When we overcome the pandemic we can have a special session in  Parliament.
Dear sir,
How it will be a silly when their belly (stomach) is full of empty  and eating other than normal food. Starvation is  also part of Corona Pandemic. Always better to stop the lose of lives at any cost .
Dear sir, I feel most danger to our nation is politicians and media personnel. Politicians grumble in Parliament and Assembly but can not consensus for nations progress and harmony. On other hand media persons many broadcast fake news and gullible people of country trust them. My appeal to both of you why not if such dire poverty are observed join hand with govt. and try to supply immediate relief measures rather barking each other without any sense. Let us join hand together and make a Ram Rajya.
Ye Sach ke jyada kreeb h, kmobesh yhi situation m oon dalito ki dekhta hu Jo lockdown ke chalte bhi 400 gharo ki mahilayo me se 300 subah hote hi ‘aalu,.  Chugne kheto me jati h, ye sachai h mere gaon ki, or police tou Ghar ke gate pr pitkar ja rhi h.
Its type of peas grows in jungle…marshy land……I used to eat during my childhood.  Its very much tasty…but I am sure about nutrition in it.
You can find these in wheat also.
Journalist seems to be using ghisa pita formula of freedom of press to get famous with wild imaginative story
Ache din of people
It’s ok to have photoshoot with some grass on the table inside an AC room. But can that DM and his son rely on ankari dal as daily diet ?
It’s ok to have photoshoot with some grass on table in AC room. But can that DM and his son rely on ankari dal as daily diet ?
Dalits are at the receiving end not only in India but anywhere in the world. Except for some Dalits who are lucky to be in urban areas they are in a no win situation. Bulk of the marginalised people trekking back from cities like new Delhi to UP and Bihar belong to the Dalit category or Muslims. Their votes are fragmented and they are of no use to BJP.
They are in a no win situation. Well fed DMs can pose for pictures with some greens. Are not mushers supposed to eat rats according to Manusmriti?
If the report is true, and it looks like it is, the poor should be helped. The reporters should be praised.
