Sonal Mansingh, Geeta Chandran & other artistes want DU to resume ECA admissions
New Delhi: Several prominent artistes across the country have raised objections against the Delhi University scrapping admissions under the extracurricular (ECA) activities quota this year.
The university had announced earlier this month that it would not be conducting admissions under the ECA category due to the coronavirus pandemic.
In a letter addressed to Vice President M. Venkaiah Naidu Friday, who is also the chancellor of the university, prominent artistes, including classical dancers Sonal Mansingh and Geeta Chandran, appealed to the university to reconsider its decision.
“A recent announcement has greatly pained the community of artistes. This has been the removal this year of the category of arts and sports in the admissions done by Delhi University under its Extra Curricular Activities (ECA) quota,” the letter by the “Guru and artistes of India” read.
It also talked about the “unprecedented stresses” the arts are already under and how this move aggravated the situation.
“This year, when the constituency of the arts is already reeling under unprecedented stresses, its valence has been further eroded with the decision of not opening the ECA quota to the Arts and Sports,” it added.
Also read: Delhi University postpones open book exams by 10 days in view of rising Covid cases
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Five per cent reservation is granted under the Sports and ECA category in every college in DU.
According to officials at the university, close to 10,000 students apply for admissions under the ECA category quota every year.
However, this year, the university decided to scrap admissions under ECA because of the pandemic, and inability of colleges to conduct trials because of it.
In its admission guidelines, DU noted, “Due to the unprecedented situation of COVID -19 pandemic and prevailing public health guidelines, admission based on ECA will take place for the category of NCC and NSS only and admission based on Sports will take place without the conduct of Sports Trial.”
Under the ECA category, only those who are associated with the NCC or NSS will get admission this year and not those who excel in some form of the arts like music, dance, debate, photography and others.
The ECA category usually comprises of 12 disciplines including dance, music, debating, acting, photography under which, students can get admission on the basis of trials. During the trials they are supposed to perform the particular activity in front of members of the admission committee and a selected jury.
Also read: Delhi HC refuses to interfere in Delhi University’s decision to hold open book exams
The letter by the artists also cited the Supreme Court’s decision to allow the Jagannath Rath Yatra in Odisha, to argue that with safety norms, the ECA trials can be conducted by the colleges.
“If we can take a generous view of the Rath Yatra, we implore you to take a generous view in this case too. We feel that in this case, the numbers can easily be managed through social distancing and normal Covid precautions of sanitizing and wearing of masks,” read the letter.
