ABP on China’s ‘dhokha’, Sardana sees Shiv Sena v/s sadhus & Rahul Kanwal has hopeful news
New Delhi: Some good news, some accusations and a lesson in humanity — prime time news Wednesday was, well kinda the same as every day.
ABP News accused China of supplying poor quality testing kits to India while Aaj Tak’s Rohit Sardana discussed the Shiv Sena government’s newest enemy — sadhus of India.
NDTV India’s Ravish Kumar, however, discussed the progress being made with plasma therapy across the US, Italy, and finally in India. Even India Today’s Rahul Kanwal had some good news — a new human vaccine trial started by Oxford University that could arrive in India as early as December.
On NDTV’s 24×7’s ‘Reality Check’, Sreenivasan Jain reminded us that doctors and medical professionals are humans too, and spoke to an AIIMS doctor who said that medical professionals are so panicked that they too are claiming to not be able to do their duties because of illnesses, hypertension, children or elders at home.
Back to ABP: “Cheen ne pehle corona diya, ab dhokha diya” (China first gave us corona, now a betrayal), said Romana Isar Khan. On ‘Samvidhaan ki Shapath’, Khan discussed how ICMR has asked states to halt the use of rapid testing kits after many reported faulty kits.
“Koi bhi saga nahi, jo cheen se thagga nahi (There is no one who has not been cheated by China),” she said, explaining how countries like Spain, Georgia, Malaysia, Netherland, Finland, Turkey have all complained about China’s testing kits.
“The world knows the reality of ‘made in China’, but in this difficult painful time of corona, this stamp of ‘made in China’ has remained” she said. However, Dr Sanjeev Chaubey, a doctor based in Shanghai, said this wasn’t the case. “Aise koi thaggu ke laddu nahi hain,” he joked, referring to the Kanpuri phrase.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
He explained that China had used these test kits actively in Wuhan, but when the issue of supplying them in bulk to countries arose it’s possible proper quality checks were not in place.

On NDTV India’s ‘Prime Time’, Ravish Kumar discussed that many states are asking ICMR for permission to conduct plasma therapy trials for Covid-19 patients. He explained that two of Delhi’s hospitals already had permission, one of which had a critical patient who had come off the ventilator — “an initial success”.
“Plasma therapy koi formula nahi, (no formula)” he said, explaining that the therapy is being tried, but it cannot be conclusively said that it is effective.
“Santon ki sunegi sarkar?” asked Rohit Sardana on Aaj Tak’s ‘Dangal’, referring to the Palghar lynching case. He said that Shiv Sena was once considered a “kattar (strict) Hindu party” but now the sadhu-sant community has the daggers out for the party after the incident in which two sadhus from the Juna Akhada were violently beaten to death.
“Maharashtra government probably had a peaceful night’s sleep assuming the matter had no communal angle,” said Sardana, but added that despite 110 people being arrested, the BJP and RSS have not let this opportunity slip from their hands. Sangh-related organisation Vanvaasi Kalyan Ashram has accused the government of religious discrimination in the matter. “Now Congress-NCP- backed Shiv Sena has two challenges — save its Hindutva face, and uphold the secular promises of its alliance,” exclaimed Sardana.

On India Today’s ‘Newstrack’, anchor Rahul Kanwal promised to deliver hope after weeks of delivering grim news. He said that researchers at Oxford University are confident that the first human vaccine could be ready as early as September and could arrive in India as early as December. “No waiting for 18 months, we could have a human vaccine in the next few months,” he said, explaining that Oxford beginning trials could be a “ray of hope” in this “corona war”.
On NDTV 24×7 ‘Reality Check’, host Sreenivasan Jain dedicated his segment to the doctors and health workers on the frontline battle against Covid-19 — dozens of them have been infected and some have even died.
Dr Anjan Trikha of AIIMS showed how doctors had to wear protective gear that was almost like space suits. Trikha explained that both paramedical workers and doctors were concerned, and thanks to the “University of Whatsapp”, everyone was ill-informed and concerned.
