Yogi govt orders manufacturing of 66 crore triple-layer khadi masks amid Covid-19 outbreak
Lucknow: The Yogi Adityanath government in Uttar Pradesh Saturday issued an order to manufacture triple-layer khadi masks in its efforts to contain the spread of the coronavirus pandemic.
The order was issued during a high-level meeting, chaired by the chief minister, with ‘Team-11’ officials to review the state’s preparedness to tackle Covid-19 and also to take stock of the current situation. 
The meeting was held at the CM’s official residence in Lucknow.
Government officials said Adityanath ordered the manufacturing of 66 crore ‘khadi’ masks. The poor will get the masks free of cost, while they will be sold at a ‘nominal’ price to the rest, officials added.
These khadi masks can be reused and are washable. 
The ‘Team-11’ team was formed to formulate strategies to tackle the pandemic and the lockdown crisis. 
The group comprises senior civil servants, including state Chief Secretary R.K. Tiwari and Additional Chief Secretary Awaneesh Awasthi.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Uttar Pradesh reported shortage of masks a few days ago when an association of ambulance employees stopped work over non-payment of salaries and lack of adequate protective gear.
According to sources, in a meeting held with the ‘Team-11’ officials Friday, Adityanath has asked them to prepare an action plan to deal with the challenging circumstances and also take measures to ensure social distancing.
He has further asked officials to plan when and how markets, colleges and shopping malls can be reopened after the lockdown ends.
The chief minister has reviewed the situation of the quarantine centers too. 
Also read: In fight against coronavirus, India has age on its side. Numbers show
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
