Tablighi Jamaat scare: Arnab calls it deliberate, ‘whole country in danger’ says Liyaquat
New Delhi: ‘Callous’, ‘criminal’ ‘mazaak’ (joke) — the anger against the Tablighi Jamaat congregation, which was held in Delhi and is now being termed as the largest ‘viral vector’ of coronavirus in South Asia, was evident across news channels Tuesday night.
ABP News’ Rubika Liyaquat and Aaj Tak’s Anjana Om Kashyap angrily discussed how the Jamaat had made a joke of social-distancing that was being carried out by the rest of the country. Arnab Goswami, on Republic TV, was even more unforgiving and called it a “deliberate” and “callous” conspiracy to spread coronavirus, while India Today’s Rajdeep Sardesai dwelt on the herculean task before the government to track attendees of the gathering.
On ‘Halla Bol’, Kashyap weighed in on the issue on Aaj Tak. “Markaz ne mamla bigaad diya hain,” (Markaz has spoilt the situation) she said, pointing out at how people from 16 countries had assembled at the congregation. To drive her point home, she showed a map visualising the 16 countries that included Nepal, Myanmar, Indonesia, Singapore , Sri lanka etc. This was done by other channels, like India TV, as well.
“Aadesho ki dhajiyan udayin, social distancing ka mazaak,”  (Orders have been shred to smithereens, and social distancing has been made into a joke), she declared with dramatic flair.

Goswami was at his dramatic best Tuesday. He alleged that Tablighi Jamaat was part of a conspiracy to spread coronavirus in “his” country with “acute deliberate callousness”. Speaking of the foreign followers of the Jamaat apparently violating Visa rules and hiding in mosques he asked —  “What do they want to do in my country? Why are they spreading in my country?”
“A conspiracy against India will have to be bought down with effectiveness,” he declared.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Surprisingly, NDTV’s 24×7’s Sanket Upadhyay sounded almost like Goswami, albeit a much-softer version.
Commenting on how ‘The Nizamuddin Superspreader’ story was “spiralling out of control”, he said that it was a clear case of criminal negligence.
“Who was the person responsible? Who are these people who have jeopardised India’s fight against coronavirus?,” he asked.
To explain the severity of the incident, he explained how out of the 57 people from Tamil Nadu who attended the gathering, 50 had tested positive for coronavirus.
On ABP News ‘Seedha Sawal’, Rubika Liyaquat gave a monologue about how all the country’s citizens have been engaged in a war against Covid-19. She added that “Iss jung mein laparwahi ki koi gunjaish nahi hain” (In this war, there is no room for any kind of carelessness) “Iota bhar bhi nahi, ratti bhar bhi nahi (not even an iota),” she emphasised.
But in New Delhi, she added, this fight has become a joke. Instead of social distancing, over a thousand people had congregated in Nizamuddin.
Only when news of coronavirus deaths from Kashmir to Telangana started pouring in did the police and the authorities wake up, she argued.
“The whole country is in danger because of this slip up,” she warned.
Jamaat associate Mujib-ur-Rehman explained that the Jamaat usually has 12,000-14,000 people inside it, but after 22 March only 2,000 people were left. He claimed that before the government had taken any steps for a lockdown, the Jamaat had itself taken steps for social distancing which were announced on 22 March.
Liyaquat, however, wasn’t convinced — apparent by how vigorously she shook her head. She pointed out that the Delhi government had already enforced the Epidemic Act from 12 March, which included an order that said no more than 200 people could gather.

On Zee News’ ‘Taal Thok Ke’, host Mimansa Malik asked BJP leader G.V.L. Narasimha Rao why were people allowed to assemble in Nizammudin in the first place? Rao said that the Prime Minister had been warning people against gatherings since the time of Holi. “How many people can the police watch?”, he asked, pointing out that it was the responsibility of people too.
“Dilli ho ya desh ho, sab kuch police se kaise sambhal sakta hain?” (Whether it’s Delhi or the country, how much can the police possibly handle?)
India Today host Rajdeep Sardesai asked who should be held responsible — Tabligh-e-Jamaat , its supporters, the police, or the Delhi government?
Kerala Governor Arif Mohamad Khan took a different angle— speeches made by the Jamaat chief from 18 March onwards were made available on Youtube. Khan explained how in the videos the chief told viewers that instead of avoiding mosques, one should go to mosques and only leave them once this was all over. “I find this more problematic,” he explained, as more than 70,000-80,000 people were watching the chief’s apparent theories of how coronavirus was a conspiracy to lock up mosques.
Khan denounced this as irresponsible, and said he was disappointed that “religious sentiments are being exploited to spread superstition, ignorance, [and] the romance of regression”.

Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
What’s wrong in that they have committed crime
Arrest and initiate stringent action against all those attended the tablighi jamaat meet
Arrest every one who attended the Delhi Islamic congregation send them to Andaman Islands jail with keys thrown into Indian Ocean
i think that seriously Arnab Goswami; who has been elected as the most rabidly demented new anchor and channel owner in the world; has totally lost it. he is spreading all the anti Muslim propaganda. He fails to inform that Over 80,000 people visited an important shrine in South India on march 17 and 18. This is an administrative problem. Not a communal one
You are speaking like a traitor.
Treat this as Terrorism and punish the guilty
Govt should become very strict with certain radical groups and perhaps use emergency like powers to isolate them in remote places
Debates on markaz by Godi media mafia’s is a Delibret attempt to divert public attention from government failures and mismanagement of crisis of migrant workers,
Both central and state Government should answer why   didn’t arrange necessary transportation and accommodation to move people from markaz inspite of numerous requests from markaz
Debates on markaz by Godi media mafia’s is a Delibret attempt to divert public attention from government failures and mismanagement of crisis,
Both central and state Government should answer why it failed to arrange necessary transportation and accommodation to move people from markaz inspite of numerous requests from markaz,
Whatever was said all was judiviable ,it was nothing infront of corona outbreak .but why you people always taje a soft angle towards the rulebreakers,are you just and fair at your part ?
Must come down real hard on these people and lock them up
Where is Rizvana from Shaheen Bhag who said,  “We offer namaz five times a day and we wash our hands every time”? There was no need to bring a communal tone in answering a question related to stopping the protest.
Obviously all are concerned that the great danger caused to the nation. Each and everyone responsible including  the jamaatis the administration the police the airport authority must be punished. We hope we shall overcome.  But I doubt whether we shall be able to win over the venom spitting virus, the Corona communalist.
Delhi government was sleeping? Didn’t they know congregation is going to take place?
It is deliberate, there is no doubt about that. Their conduct in quarantine substantiates that.
Please I request, most of all to this sper stupid chief anchor of Republic instead of going on creating chaos and confusion and blaming the community etc?, etc.  It is best to pass on the message/news and the irresponsibility of the particular group, and advise the rest of the viewers with calmness poise, instead of screaming and screeching like I don’t know what.  Is that what journalism has taught, to please a particular group he acts like a chamcha.  Initially I used to admire him and his way of tackling and debating, but now he acts like a mad dog has bitten, just what is wrong, has he himself seen the videos of his debates.  Accepted that the community could be irresponsible and  stubborn.  That can be taken to task and there is always the law enforcement agencies who can deal with it, please give sane news about this incident I appeal to your good senses.  Thank you
let him talk about the other shrines of non-Muslims, where 100,000 or more people gathered in CLOSE proximity in mid March..
What a weapon in the hands of the jihadis of any colour green ,red,or,saffron to kill it’s enymies enmass.Thanks corona It may be incarnation of lord Krishna who promised sambhavimi uge uge  let khujliwal throw light on this since he is reading mahabharat these days.pagal sala .
Tablighi jama at was irresponsible in organising such a large gathering but where were law enforcing agencies all these days and weeks  becos congregation held publicly and in a public place. All Foregn delegates came with valid visa, they were allowed to pass into the country by authorities. So GOVT also shown a very unforgivable irresponsibility in this situation. No doubts.
High time to take action against those mullahs and maulavis who are running parallel government and spoiling a beutiful country like India. While the entire country is observing lock sown and folllowing the instructions of state and centre, this Maulavis encouraging muslims to attend mosque and calling this is a conspiracy for them not to attend mosque.
Why can’t I say this is a planned act. Some idiots like Owaisi will come to defend.
Why shouldn’t we hate these Maulavis.
Why Mr. Arvind Kejriwal is just watching it like a spectator.
Muslims are a favoured lot among all people in India.So  no need to complain now.Thanks to Cong.and other opposition parties for treating them has vote banks,not human.
Every thing is to be done only by police, Delhi Government, Central Government, and obviously Modi. People will not co-operate. They will play a blame game.
This particular congregation is supposed to be held in Indonesia, but is changed to India
 ( easy target ) . It is only a biological war against India , because commiting  suicide
Is a common among Muslims, because these
Innocent  lower and middle-class Muslims
Can easily be brainwashed .
WHEN TRUMP CAME TO INDIA
HOW MANY ATTENDED?
Any control was there, when first case of Corona identified in February?
ON 13th March Did govt announce “there is no fear of
Corona?
Nizamuddin jamath was on 13th March To 15th March?
Did PM announced on 24th that “be where ever you are”?
So obeying PM is a crime?
Did yogi attended a function after PM announced lock down?
Did Karnatak chief minister attended marriage?
Swearing in ceremony in MP, what action taken?
Coimbatore sadguru conducted huge gathering, any action?
Tirupati temple lakhs attended any action?
When Airport was screening from January onwards, how affected foreigners came inside?
We fail to cope- up with the pandemic. Only excuse we take is to fight within ourselves and blame each other for the losses. It seems patience and humanity is the least concern in the coming days.
I agree with Gopala k. Because of a particular community, hands of police are tied. If government does anything, Bollywood stars, NDTV and “secular” people make hue and cry. Its misfortune of our country. Instead of the conspirators, they are blaming government.
If this assembly is by Hindus I want to see how
PRINT  would have reacted
If we feel this is a threat to our nation please take quick decision to isolate all partcipants and put them in a big fort so that they will not spread to community. Let them die with their own wishes without transmitting  diseases to others.
Please read this timeline of Markaz Nizamuddin too..
*PRESS NOTE ISSUED BY MARKAZ NIZAMUDDIN DATED 31.03.2020*
1)- Markaz Nizamuddin is the international headquarters of Tabilghi Jamaat for close to 100 years. Visitors/guests/devotees/worshippers from across the globe throng the place for pre-scheduled programs lasting for no more than 3-5 days. All the programs are decided a year in advance in order to facilitate visitors from far-off places to plan their participation.
*2)- When Hon’ble Prime Minister announced the “Janta Curfew”, for 22nd March 2020, the ongoing program in Markaz Nizamuddin was discontinued immediately, however due to sudden cancelation of rail services across the country on 21st March 2020, a large group of visitors who had to depart by way of railways got stuck in the Markaz premises.*
3)- On 22nd March 2020, “Janta Curfew” was observed and accordingly visitors were advised not to venture out until 9 PM as desired by the Hon’ble Prime Minister, therefore the plans to move back to their native places by way of means other than railways also did not materialize. Before the Janta Curfew could be lifted at 9PM, the Hon’ble Chief Minister of Delhi announced lockdown of Delhi beginning at 6AM on 23rd March 2020 till 31st March 2020, thereby further diminishing any chances of these visitors availing road transport for their journey back home. Despite this challenging situation, with the help of Markaz administration, around fifteen hundred visitors left Markaz Nizamuddin by availing whatever meager transport was available.
*4)- Suddenly on the evening of 23rd March, a further nationwide lockdown was announced by the Hon’ble Prime Minister with clear message for people to stay-put wherever they are. Under such compelling circumstances there was no option for Markaz Nizamuddin but to accommodate the stranded visitors with prescribed medical precautions till such time that situation becomes conducive for their movement or arrangements are made by the authorities.*
5)- On 24th March 2020, suddenly a notice was issued by SHO, P.S. Hazrat Nizamuddin, seeking closure of Markaz premises. The same was responded on 24th March 2020, stating that the compliance of the directions regarding closure of Markaz is already underway and around 1500 people had departed the previous day, thus leaving around 1000 visitors belonging to different states and nationalities in Markaz. It was also informed that the Ld. SDM concerned had been requested to issue vehicle passes so that the remaining people could be sent back to their native places outside of Delhi. It is relevant to indicate here that lists of 17 vehicles with registration numbers along with the names of the drivers plus their license details were submitted to the Ld. SDM so that the stranded visitors/guests could be ferried towards their destination. The requisite permission is still awaited.
*6)- On 25th March 2020, the Tehsildaar along with medical team visited the Markaz, full cooperation was provided for their inspection as well as in preparation of list of visitors, many of whom were examined by them.*
7)- On 26th March 2020, the Ld. SDM visited Markaz Nizamuddin and called us for a further meeting with the Ld. DM. We met the Ld. DM, apprised him of the stranded visitors and once again sought permission for the vehicles arranged by us.
*8)-The next day, i.e. 27th March 2020, six persons were taken for medical check-up.*
9)- On 28th March 2020, the Ld. SDM and WHO team visited the Markaz and 33 persons were taken for medical checkup to Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Hospital. Surprisingly on the same day another notice was issued, this time by the Office of ACP, Lajpat Nagar, reiterating the prohibitory orders and warning of legal action, this being totally oblivious of the above deliberations and steps that had already been taken by Markaz Nizamuddin in consultation with the authorities. However, the same was replied in detail vide letter dated 29th March 2020.
*10)- Yesterday, 30th March 2020, a rumour started gaining ground across social media that allegedly people affected with COVID-19 are present in Markaz. It is also being circulated that certain deaths have occurred due to the same. Unexpectedly, as reported by ANI, the Hon’ble Chief Minister of Delhi went on to say that he has directed authorities to take legal action against the administration of Markaz. It is humbly stated that if the above fact-check could have been done by the Office of Hon’ble Chief Minister, the authorities would have apprised him about their visits, deliberations and cooperation extended by the Markaz in order to disperse the remaining visitors. During this entire episode, Markaz Nizamuddin never violated any provision of law, and always tried to act with compassion and reason towards the visitors who came to Delhi from different states. It did not let them violate the medical guidelines by thronging ISBTs or roaming on streets.*
11)- Markaz Nizamuddin would like to humbly offer the entire premises as a quarantine facility to help the authorities tide-over the challenge of current pandemic. Throughout its 100-year existence, Markaz Nizamuddin has an unblemished history of cooperating with administration/ authorities and always upholding the rule of law in letter and spirit. In the present challenge of COVID-19, Markaz stands with the law enforcement authorities and shall remain forthcoming in complying with all the guidelines issued by them.
جزاک اللہ ……..
31-03-2020  TUESDAY
The sudden lockdown put so many ppl in such situations..
Really sad how the tabligh jamaat is being in the limelight for the past two days ..being portrayed in such a negative manner …
Well explained Brother .Jazakallahu khairan .May Allah protect all from every illness and false propaganda.
What about yogi Aditya Nath who celebrated
Ram navmi with all 100- 150 officials on govt expenses on 27 march
As long as Muslims believe in the after life more than this life, this sort of tableeghi would go on.
दो दिन पहले देश के लाखों लोग शहरों से अपने गांवों की तरफ पैदल और बसों में भर कर जा रहे थे। शहरों के स्टेशनों पर हज़ारों यात्रियों की भीड़ और सरकारों की बद-इंतिज़ामी पूरे देश में चर्चा का विषय बन गयी थी। जैसे ही इन सब पर गंभीर सवाल उठने शुरू हुए, निहायत ही शातिराने अंदाज़ में वायरस का “धर्म परिवर्तन” और “दल-बदल” कर दिया गया। इस विकट परिस्थिति में जहां लोगों और प्रशासन की लापरवाही पर जहां सवाल उठाने और अव्यवस्था से उत्पन्न ख़तरे से सख़्ती से निपटने के प्रयासों पर बात होनी चाहिए थी,  उसके स्थान पर सीधे एक विशेष धर्म और विशेष दलों की सरकारों को इस वायरस का जनक घोषित किया जा रहा है। लोग अब कोरोना से ज़्यादा धर्म से डर/बच/नफ़रत कर रहे हैं। दरअसल यही तो चाहिए था सरकार को। आप असली मुद्दों पर जैसे ही गंभीर हुए, एक निहायत ही ग़ैर-ज़रूरी बहस अदबदा के छेड़ दी जाती है। और यही इस देश की सभी समस्याओं का “न्यू-नार्मल” समाधान है।
Shut up you communal morons… U have hate for Muslims that’s it.
What abt yogi aarti? What abt MP chief minister function? What abt janta curfew? Where thousands poured out on street? This is not only Indian govt failure, Delhi govt, policethey r the real culprits.. They shld have taken action against them.
You shut up! Moron!
The Muslims have to answer.
The Muslims have to answer. Why are we scared to ask Muslims to answer.
The Muslims have to answer. Why are we scared to ask Muslims to answer, it is not about targeting Muslims. If someone does an illegal act, legal action has to be taken. So take legal action against these Muslims. Unfortunately, no legal action will be taken against these criminals and they will infect thousands.
Now libtards and presstitutes will start crying for minority harassment and some New Delhi women journalists who had special tastes for multiple bed buddies, veteran and political pimps will shed tears for these salwardharis who had endangered lakhs of people. How long this country will have to live with these jahils
Hell with their blind faith …They have proved to be lawless  time and again….The entire nation is in turmoil ….To fight against these goons is more arduous
than fighting against the Corona crisis. Even now their notorious leaders don’t want to admit their fault but point fingers at honourable PM Modi as usual.
“Doob  Marna chahiye”
See people over there were present in the corridor before regulations from government came
People who decided to move out were were stranded there bcoz of unavailability of transport services
Yeah it was an act of negligience shown by the markaz authorities
But media and other peopleshouldn’t communalize such a issue rather try to collect suggestion to solve the issue
How long will Press continue to support those who have conspired & infected thousands across India.
Rioters are scholars, covid19 conspirators the Tablighis are Patients.  How long will Press continue to support those who have conspired & infected thousands across India. They were picked up for treatment and they started spitting from the bus. Their agenda was clear. Dont cover such monsters of humanity.
Arnab is on pay list of fake hindus ,who made him member of nehru museum ,wht else one can expect,
But, who gave permission for this kind of congregation? Police should check first.
Muslims have no reasons to complain, they have brought it all upon themselves. The weird way Muslims have been practicing their faith has come to bite them.I have no problem when anchors say it was deliberate.Muslims must know that in the midst of Corona scare the jamath has brought out serious questions on their responsibility as a Indian citizen. Muslims deserve the tag of being a shame and a burden
https://youtu.be/lkzbCt1t50A
Hope the country stays United against the virus .. plz don’t divide because of misinformations.
Well said. Not only as Muslim but as an Indian. I wish these radicals Maulana should learn Islam from people like Harun. I am proud of you. CM Kalsi Ex-serviceman IAF
