Paytm employee in Gurugram tests positive for coronavirus, had just returned from Italy
New Delhi: Digital payments firm Paytm Wednesday shut down its offices in Gurugram and Noida for two days after one of its employees tested positive for the coronavirus, reported PTI. The news agency also said the employee had just returned from a holiday in Italy.
In an official statement, the company said it has suggested team members of the Covid-19 (latest strain of coronavirus) patient from the Gurugram office to get health tests done immediately, while shutting down its offices for sanitisation purposes.
“We have also advised all our colleagues to work from home for a couple of days while we get our offices sanitised,” a Paytm spokesperson told news agency IANS.
This is the second confirmed case of coronavirus in the national capital region (NCR).
The latest addition in NCR has taken the countrywide figure to 29.
Also read: Coronavirus: Latest updates on cases in India, all you need to know about COVID-19
The first case was reported from Mayur Vihar Tuesday when a 46-year-old man tested positive for the virus that has now spread in over 70 countries.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
At least 46 people are being kept under surveillance in the national capital to prevent a spread of the disease that has claimed more than 3,000 lives across the world, reported Hindustan Times.
In a statement Wednesday, the Union Health Ministry said that India has 28 confirmed cases of coronavirus.
“Out of 28, three cases are from Kerala, one from Delhi, six from Agra, one from Telangana whereas remaining 16 are group of Italian tourists, along one Indian driver,” Health Minister Harsh Vardhan said at a press conference in the national capital.
The minister said the situation is not yet “grave” in the country but people should use masks, and avoid gatherings to prevent the spread.
Over 3,000 people have died so far amid the virus outbreak that started from the Chinese city of Wuhan.
Disclosure: Paytm is among the distinguished founder-investors of ThePrint. Please click here for details on investors.
