Yogi Adityanath goes viral on Chinese social media for ‘yoga cures coronavirus’ speech
New Delhi: Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath’s claim that yoga can cure coronavirus has gone viral in China, the country where the disease originated.
In a speech delivered Sunday during the Yoga Mahotsav in Rishikesh, Uttarakhand, Adityanath had said that regular practice of yoga can fight deadly diseases, including coronavirus. There is no scientific basis to this claim.
“Indian tradition needs to be deeply understood and it has great things to offer through yoga. The world is fighting a battle against physical and mental illnesses. With the help of yoga, diseases like blood pressure, heart attack, kidney failure, liver failure and even coronavirus can be dealt with,” he said
According to social media buzz, Adityanath’s speech is being widely discussed on platforms like Weibo, a Twitter-like Chinese platform that serves as an open discussion forum.
The video has garnered millions of views and over 6,000 comments.
Also read: Stay calm & don’t believe rumours on coronavirus: PM Modi urges nation
Adityanath is not the only politician to make such claims about the coronavirus. Assam BJP MLA Suman Haripriya had claimed in the state assembly Monday that gaumutra (cow urine) and gobar (cow dung) could be used for the prevention of coronavirus.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“We all know that cow dung is very helpful. Likewise, if cow urine is sprayed, it purifies an area… I believe something similar could be done with gaumutra and gobar to cure coronavirus,” she said.
These comments come at a time when the world is dealing with a massive outbreak of the deadly strain of the coronavirus, COVID-19. China has recorded nearly 3,000 fatalities so far, while nearly 100,000 cases of the disease have been reported worldwide. In India, 31 cases of coronavirus have been confirmed.
The Indian authorities are taking all necessary precautions to prevent further spread of the disease, including shutting down schools, monitoring travellers at airports, and issuing regular advisories to citizens.
Also read: How bad is coronavirus? Let’s compare with SARS, Ebola, Flu
