‘Corona’ is not just a virus. Indians are using it as a slur against people from northeast
The coronavirus pandemic has unleashed a new kind of racism. It made Donald Trump call it the ‘Chinese virus’, a racist slur. Now, it’s making Indians call people from the eight northeastern states ‘corona’ and ‘virus’.
This isn’t the first time that people from the northeastern states of Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Assam, Sikkim, Tripura, Mizoram, Manipur and Meghalaya are being otherised and targeted by ‘mainland’ Indians. They have been called ‘chinkis’, ‘momos’ and ‘Chinese’ for decades. Now a new term of abuse has been added to their bigoted lexicon.
Also Read: Advisory issued over racial remarks against Northeast Indians in wake of coronavirus
On Sunday night around 9:30 pm in Delhi’s north campus area, a man on a scooty spat paan on a woman from Manipur, calling her ‘corona’ as he sped away. In another incident, nine young professionals from Nagaland living in Gujarat’s Ahmedabad with no travel history or symptoms were forced to spend more than 24 hours in a quarantine facility because they were mistaken as ‘Chinese’ and complaints were made against them in their office stating that they were infected with the ‘virus.’
The list doesn’t end here, in fact, a couple of days back at a mall in Pune, a woman covered her face when she saw a woman from Manipur and gestured looking at her like she was ‘infected’. Two students from Darjeeling also faced racial slurs linked to coronavirus in Kolkata.
It looks like India’s latent racism has been unleashed with full force, exposing all the underlying bigotry and the desire to treat people from the northeast states as second-class citizens.
Also Read: ‘Beaten, abused, spat on’: People from Northeast endure racist slurs amid coronavirus panic
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“Oh, so are you from India,” is the most common form of racism that people from northeast tolerate, followed by a very ridiculous negotiation of Indianness.
When I tell racists that I am from Assam, they often asked me if Assam is a part of India, and this is not one isolated incident. As a matter of fact, they have also asked if Sikkim and Shillong are both in one state, if Cherrapunji is a part of Nagaland and not to forget how they refuse to consider the states of northeast India as different places with different identities in terms of culture and language. It has often been expected of me to understand Mizo, or speak to Nagamese considering it’s the ‘same thing’.
With this comes the typical racist remark: “All of you look the same.”
Till when are we expected to tolerate this racism under the pretext of lack of geographical knowledge of one’s own country?And let’s not forget the occasional abusive slurs like ‘momos’, ‘chinki’ and ‘choti aankh’.
We are often looked down upon as ‘alien-like’ creatures because of the extremely distasteful and nasty perception of ‘mainland’ India that the food habits of people from northeast are ‘impure and filthy’. “Tum log to kuch bhi kha lete ho,” is the classic example of rasicm. Not everyone eats chhole bhature, and that’s okay.
What makes racism worse is it’s dangerous cocktail with misogyny. ‘Mainland men’ whether they are complete strangers you meet at a bar, the local shopkeeper or just a normal passerby, have always considered women from northeast as ‘easy’, ‘slutty.’ These conclusions they say, have been drawn from the way we ‘dress’ and ‘carry ourselves’. A friend of mine from Manipur was once bullied and mocked at by an auto driver who repeatedly kept questioning her national identity, while finding ways to take a peek at her legs. In another instance, a landlord in Delhi had told a friend of mine from Nagaland, “Aap log northeast se ho, waha ki ladkiyan to bohot party karte hai, hum ghar nahi denge,” while scanning her top to bottom.
Also Read: Social media trends #MakeChinaPay as Covid-19 forces people into indefinite quarantine
India has a social responsibility to constantly evolve and correct its ways. But this racism against the northeast has gone unchecked, and has sometimes even been encouraged.
Unfortunately, even the educated ‘elite’ class of ‘mainland’ India doesn’t understand the culture, history and demography of northeast India and indulges in casual racism, trying to turn it into light humour.
They often club, address and identify us as ‘northeasterners’ in an extremely stereotypical manner, refusing to validate the individual identity of our respective states, which people from the rest of the states enjoy.
This needs to be stopped right now because coronavirus cases are increasing day by day and who knows this systematic racism might translate into something more perilous and result in incidents like the murder of Nido Taniam in 2014. Twenty-year-old Taniam from Arunachal Pradesh was killed in broad daylight in Delhi’s Lajpat Nagar area in a fight over his ‘hairstyle’.
Views are personal.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
How can we, the NE Indians expect illiterate mainland Indians to change their prejudicial  behavior towards us even when the educated section of those Indians continue to deny the prevalence of such instances of racism meted out to us in outside NE cities or places of India. Though the GOI has shown some concerns and taking action in this domain but it does not meant for us to be complacent since illiterate people either defy govt’ s order or ignorant about it. The general mentality or perception of all anti-NE people has to change for all time to come.
How can we, the NE Indians expect illiterate mainland Indians to change their prejudicial  behavior towards us even when the educated section of those Indians continue to deny the prevalence of such instances of racism meted out to us in outside NE cities or places of India. Though the GOI has shown some concerns and taking action in this domain but it does not meant for us to be complacent since illiterate people either defy govt’ s order or ignorant about it. The general mentality or perception of all anti-NE people has to change for all time to come.
These indians are racist . We will teach them a lesson when they come to north east .  Just wait . These indians are actually corona because they are spreading the virus . North East has few cases thag also because of jamat members and bangladeshis
Agree that people from north east face racism in North India especially in Delhi.  But at the same time, before taking high moral ground, they should ponder over that they themselves hold prejudice against bengalis, unlike Delhi, which had no past history of prejudice against bengalis and in fact sheltered bengali refugees.  The current imbroglio over CAA in Assam is a classic example of prejudice against bengalis.
Corona and CAA both are different term some one getting a tag as Chinese, MOMO or Corona is a different issue and the issue CAA is all about not to allow Bangladeshi …..no doubt difference toom place but CAA was a issue which was all about how politician played ;created a huge difference but NE students getting a tag name like Corona it which means attacking verbally in individual only because of appearance …..so before commenting look at the activity do not jst try to merge a different story with a different one which doesn’t even fits.
Corona was spread by Indian not by northeast… People …
Corona have not even rich northeast.. yet …
How’s trump calling it Chinese virus makes it racist! It’s seems to me more like a pressure on CCP … No Chinese people living in china can see this because of the firewall so it doesn’t matter.
We want justice
Take necessary steps
I have never heard such an incident that any mainland north India person are beaten up in North East India. It is no true in fact north Indian people think that they are superior than northeast people. No wonder  such a comment  is pooping up bcoz india is racist country and also street look  dirty
Actual their mentally are worst than Hitler
. Come to the northeast we have cleanest village in asian. You people need to learn lession from us
I sympathize with the people of the north east, but at the same time think about how they treat people whom they consider ‘ the other’, in their region. They demand an archaic  Inner Line Permit, which the Britishers had introduced to isolate them. This demand which they make today also indicates they want to retain the isolation. So is it not expected that just as they don’t see others as their own they will also at times be in the receiving end?
Sir,  as you write this do not forget that northeast is the only place which isn’t much affected by corona virus. And about the isolation and treatment towards the people of other region,not only the northeast people but all the people of India in different regions have this attitude towards other people.As a saying goes :Every dog is a lion in its territory. So please don’t grab this chance during the pandemic to write such things towards northeastern people, instead of remaining united to fight through this crisis of corona altogether as an Indian. Because if we,the northeastern people start speaking about all the other people of different region it’ll be worse as the way you people treat us when we are in your region is even worse. Including the fact that we are minorities and are less, too less in numbers.
It will be a gift to a person if his land is of vast and pluralism. In that way if my country remains and if I could say Kashmir is ours: Kanyakumari is ours; Arunachal, Mumbai, Jaipur, etc. etc. are ours I amlucky to be born here. But if anything happens against it, it will be because of people like you and I but not by the politicians who come and go. We must respect all Indians as our brothers and sisters for our self pride also.
it seems nonsense to you people because you haven’t faced the racism we face you may be right about you guys facing racism but i have never heard about it and have only seen and heard northeastern people of India face it .
So from last weeks stingy, ridiculous article, this time the ship sails into leveraging an unfortunate, ignorant incident. 
