Districts in Delhi, Mumbai, Pune in Red Zone as Modi govt divides country to fight Covid
New Delhi: The Modi government has identified 170 districts in the country as Covid-19 hotspots classifying them under the Red Zone, 207 districts as non-hotspot districts falling under the White Zone and 353 districts as not affected at all by the pandemic, which fall under the Green Zone.
Going by Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s statement Monday, this means that 353 districts could see restrictions being lifted after 20 April if they continue to record no cases.
The restrictions will not be lifted in the 170 districts marked as Red Zones or hotspots. These include districts in several prominent cities such as Delhi, Mumbai, Bengaluru, Hyderabad, Chandigarh, Srinagar, Nagpur, Pune, Indore, among others.
Some of the districts in the White Zone include Gwalior, Kanchipuram, Puducherry, Bareilly, Varanasi, Haridwar and Kalimpong.
Also read: No matter how you look at it, India’s lockdown-2 can cost as many lives as it will save
The comprehensive all-India break-up comes after the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) asked district magistrates to classify their districts into three colour codes — Red, White and Green — on the basis of a criteria received from the empowered group on health.
The list will be updated every week.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
According to officials, districts in the country will be arranged in descending order every week on the basis of the number of cases. This was conveyed to the chief secretaries and district magistrates in two separate video-call meetings held by Cabinet Secretary Rajiv Gauba Wednesday morning. Home Secretary Ajay Bhalla was also present.
Based on the list, districts that together contribute 80 per cent of the cases in the country will be marked as Red, those with no cases will be marked as Green, and those in the middle will be marked as White.
Also, districts that together contribute 80 per cent of the cases in a state will be marked as Red Zones. Districts that do not fall under either list but have a doubling rate of less than four days will also be included in this category.
Also read: No regular income for 74% low-earning families in Ahmedabad since lockdown, finds IIM survey
Within the Red Zone districts, there will be areas with large outbreaks and clusters, which could see stricter restrictions than the rest of the district.
“To get some economic activity moving post-20 April, the whole district would not be locked down as severely as the areas with large outbreaks and clusters,” an official said.
According to the list, as of 14 April, the 170 hotspot districts have been divided into 123 “hotspot districts with large outbreaks” and 47 “hotspot districts with clusters”.
A district could move from the Red to the Green Zone if it does not report any case for 28 days, and vice-versa.
Districts with no new confirmed cases for 28 days will be marked as Green Zones.
According to the list, with 22 Red Zone districts, Tamil Nadu has recorded the maximum number of districts with hotspots, followed by Andhra Pradesh (16), Maharashtra (14), Uttar Pradesh (13), Rajasthan (12) and Delhi (10).
The UTs and states to not have any districts in the Red or White Zones are Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep, Manipur and Sikkim.
Also read: Agriculture, construction and manufacturing units get relief under new norms for lockdown 2
 
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
