Salman Khan’s quarantine gyaan, Kiran Bedi’s ‘chicks’ & environment-friendly ‘diyas’
New Delhi: Yesterday’s ‘diya jalaao’ exercise made headlines and Twitter was not far behind with thousands of tweets. Even PM Modi’s biggest critique Rahul Gandhi was singing praises of how solidarity is the need of the hour. By Monday afternoon, there were other topics of Twitter conversation too.
After WHO, Congress’ Priyanka Gandhi reiterates the most important mantra against Covid-19: “Test, Test, test”
कोरोना वाइरस के संक्रमण को रोकने का एकमात्र रास्ता ज्यादा से ज्यादा टेस्टिंग है। तभी हम संक्रमित व्यक्ति का ट्रीटमेंट कर सकते हैं।
ज्यादा से ज्यादा टेस्ट करो, ट्रीट करो-यही हमारा मंत्र होना चाहिए।
आप सबसे मेरी गुज़ारिश है-ज्यादा टेस्टिंग के लिए आवाज उठाइए।#TestMoreSaveIndia pic.twitter.com/r8NoZZV6Xu
— Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) April 6, 2020

Her brother, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi, was busy looking at the possible silver lining of the pandemic.
The #Coronavirus is an opportunity for India to unite as one people, putting aside differences of religion, caste & class; to forge one common purpose: the defeat of this deadly virus. Compassion, empathy& self sacrifice are central to this idea. Together we will win this battle. pic.twitter.com/rVmJg6tan2
— Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) April 6, 2020

Home Minister Amit Shah was more interesting in talking business, lauding the government’s decision on Monday to reduce allowances and pension of all MPs by 30% for a year and use the funds for welfare of the people.
I congratulate PM @narendramodi ji, as cabinet approves the Ordinance for reducing allowances and pension of all MPs by 30% for a year.
The Parliament of the world’s largest democracy stands together in these challenging times. I thank all the parties and MPs for their support.
— Amit Shah (@AmitShah) April 6, 2020

We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
But Congress’ Sivaganga MP Karti Chidambram vehemently opposed the move.
If the government wants to garner funds there are many ways, but to do away with MPLAD is absolutely unacceptable. It’s a sinister move to make constituency MPs redundant and enforce a Presidential form of government by stealth.
— Karti P Chidambaram (@KartiPC) April 6, 2020

Bollywood superstar Salman Khan talks about the importance of quarantine along with his nephew Nirvan Khan.
Be Home n Be Safe @NirvanKhan15 #IndiaFightsCorona pic.twitter.com/3erbteJtz6
— Salman Khan (@BeingSalmanKhan) April 5, 2020

Puducherry Governor Kiran Bedi shares a bizarre video that gives new meaning to the old adage ‘don’t count your chickens before they hatch’.
Eggs which were thrown as waste because of corona , after one week hatched . The creation of nature 🤔(Fwded) Life has its own mysterious ways.. pic.twitter.com/H7wMQqc7jc
— Kiran Bedi (@thekiranbedi) April 5, 2020

According to actor Arshad Warsi, this country has a problem bigger than coronavirus.
Just like previous pandemics, I am sure we will find the cure for Corona, what we need to do is  find a cure for stupidity, it is out of control in our country.
— Arshad Warsi (@ArshadWarsi) April 6, 2020

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal doesn’t want BJP MP Gautam Gambhir’s money but he’d be happy to accept something else from the former cricketer. Read on.
Gautam ji, thank u for ur offer. The problem is not of money but availability of PPE kits. We wud be grateful if u cud help us get them from somewhere immediately, Del govt will buy them. Thank u. https://t.co/YtFP4MjYo3
— Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) April 6, 2020

Actor Sonam Kapoor cites American author Mark Twain to sum up the stupidity of those who burst firecrackers during the nine-minute candlelight vigil Sunday.
Never argue with stupid people, they will drag you down to their level and then beat you with experience.Mark Twain
— Sonam K Ahuja (@sonamakapoor) April 6, 2020

And here’s a herd of environment-friendly diyas.
Best pix of the day #Diyas pic.twitter.com/goECquK65q
— Sudhir Suryawanshi (@ss_suryawanshi) April 5, 2020

Political activist Sudheendra Kulkarni has a suggestion for the citizens of the country.
Nothing positive can be gained by lampooning #9Minute9baje.
People of India – large numbers of them – have participated in it.
Those of us who want to unite Indian people with better ideas for a better India have to be more creative.
— Sudheendra Kulkarni (@SudheenKulkarni) April 5, 2020

Former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Mehbooba Mufti’s daughter, Iltija Mufti has a message on her mother’s detention.
244 days since my mother & countless Kashmiris were wrongfully incarcerated. With COVID, the entire world is under house arrest so it’s obvious that this isn’t preventive but punitive detention.Yet, I’ll continue fighting for her freedom till she’s home
— Mehbooba Mufti (@MehboobaMufti) April 5, 2020

PM Modi tweets in praise of the Bharatiya Janata Party on its 40th founding anniversary.
Whenever @BJP4India has got the opportunity to serve, the Party has focused on good governance and empowering the poor. In line with the Party’s ethos, our Karyakartas have worked hard to bring a positive difference in the lives of many and done great social service. #BJPat40
— Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) April 6, 2020

Speaking of birthdays and anniversaries, even amidst all the action and distraction, former Congress president Rahul Gandhi didn’t forget to wish everyone a happy Mahavir Jayanti.
महावीर जयंती के पावन अवसर पर देशवासियों को हार्दिक बधाई और शुभकामनाएं।#mahavirjayanti pic.twitter.com/RWZ1QBGi7R
— Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) April 6, 2020

Hollywood actor Ryan Reynolds’ daughter seems to have unmasked the true superheroes.
My daughters wanted to be Avengers. Now it’s Healthcare Workers because, “they’re the real heroes”.  Well, in 20 years, who’s gonna defeat a menacing, no-nonsense CGI villain, backdropped by sincere musical swells? I’m not supposed to say it out loud, but kids are dumb.
