Numerology to religious references — Modi’s call to light candles floats mystical theories
New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi Friday urged the nation to light candles and diyas for nine minutes at 9 pm Sunday to “defeat the despair” brought by the coronavirus pandemic.
In his previous address on 19 March, the PM had asked people to clap, ring bells or clang utensils to applaud the healthcare personnel, who are treating Covid-19 patients.
At that time, several people on social media were quick to come up with a host of different theories about ‘bartan’ clanging and clapping, including Bollywood megastar Amitabh Bachchan, who claimed that vibrations from clapping and blowing conch shells would reduce coronavirus potency.

This time too, many people shared different theories on social media about how lighting candles and diyas can kill the virus.
In a forwarded message doing the rounds on WhatsApp, “PM’s numerology” over number 9 was mentioned — the announcement was made at 9 am Friday morning, which lasted 9 minutes, and the lighting of candles will take place on 5 April (5+4 [the month of April]=9) at 9 pm for 9 minutes.
The message further said Modi’s address coincided with the 9th day of the lockdown, and on 5 April, there would be 9 days left for the 21-day lockdown to come to an end.
Congress MP Shashi Tharoor even Tweeted, saying Modi is invoking “auspicious elements Hinduism associates with number 9”. 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
This is no accident: the PM spoke on Ram Navami at 9 am for 9 mins, asked us to light diyas & candles on 5/4 at 9 pm for 9 mins. He is invoking all the auspicious elements Hinduism associates with number 9. Back to Ram Bharose?! #COVID19 must be more serious than we thought!
— Shashi Tharoor (@ShashiTharoor) April 3, 2020

Also read: Coronavirus doesn’t stop Indian Army from carrying out its annual cyber security exercise
There were reports about whether PM Modi had any fondness for number five, similar to earlier theories about whether he has any obsession with number eight.
A Twitter user called the PM’s move a “masterstroke”, saying switching off lights will produce massive amount of heat that will eventually kill the virus.
Masterstroke by PM Modi. One cannot stop admiring him. When billions of people will burn candles and diyas together, it'll release a huge amount of heat and light energy into the atmosphere. This will increase the atmospheric temperature and Coronavirus can't survive.
Modi Modi.
— Tanmay (@sentiyapaa) April 3, 2020

There were others who linked the move to Hindu festival Vamana Dwadashi.
April 5th is Vamana Dwadashi. On that day, the earth gets maximum light from Sun and this empowers disease causing viruses. The virus is a evil entity and it thrives in darkness. According to Adiyogi Purana, one way to destroy such evil entities is to focus light on it, like 1/3
— Karthik (@beastoftraal) April 3, 2020

 
A video has also been doing the round on Twitter in which Dr K.K. Agarwal, former president of the Indian Medical Association, shared his theory to support PM Modi’s plan.
He said the PM’s request for everyone to come together and light diyas is based on “Yoga Vasistha Chapter 6”, referring to the principle of collective consciousness. 
“If we all can collectively think that coronavirus doesn’t infect the ACE2 receptors in our body, then collective consciousness will make sure that it happens,” he said in the video.
ACE2 is the host cell receptor responsible for mediating infection by Covid-19.
I got you all covered. Let the collective stupidity burn. pic.twitter.com/DKGwuXlN0d
— Srinivas Kodali (@digitaldutta) April 3, 2020

Also read: India isn’t on top of list for coronavirus test kits suppliers
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
