Ujala says Amit Shah should take responsibility for Delhi riots, Jagran blames Shaheen Bagh
Amar Ujala talks about coronavirus. It says coronavirus has widely spread all over the world. Countries, including South Korea, Italy and Iran, have also been affected. The World Health Organisation said that China needs help from all over the world, but the country said it doesn’t want to take any help from India, despite India wanting to help China.
Dainik Jagran talks about religious freedom. It says any country that is giving lessons on religious freedom to India doesn’t know anything about India. In India, a section of the media is propagating that the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) is discriminatory. India is a country where everyone lives with dignity and it has values and ethics. People who don’t like Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the RSS are representing India as an intolerant country, says Jagran.
Amar Ujala and Dainik Bhaskar talk about US President Donald Trump’s visit to India. The ‘Namaste Trump’ event, organised in Gujarat, clearly indicates how the relationship between Modi and Trump has developed in the last two years. 
The US Presidential election is going to be held after a few months and due to the geopolitical issues in the world, both India the US need each other.
The collaboration and cooperation is good for both the countries. But the question is can Trump show courage to say that India should be in the Nuclear Suppliers Group? 
Dainik Jagran also mentions about a new chapter of friendship between Trump and Modi. It says that media propagated that Trump will talk about religious freedom, the CAA, the National Register of Citizens (NRC) and Kashmir. Trump said in his speech the CAA is an internal matter in India. Fake news has been propagated in the name of the CAA. But, the truth is not going to change. The CAA is meant to give citizenship to people and not take it away. It concludes by saying Trump’s visit was good for India.
Amar Ujala comments on Delhi riots. It says Union Home Minister Amit Shah should come out on the roads and take responsibility. Both the pro-CAA and anti-CAA protesters should be punished, and the government should ensure the safety and security of the people.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The paper also mentioned about BJP East Delhi MP Gautam Gambhir’s remarks in which he said that party leader Kapil Mishra’s speech was not acceptable and asked for strict action against those responsible for making such speeches, regardless of their party affiliations.
Dainik Bhaskar talks about the Bihar assembly passing a resolution, saying that the NRC will not be implemented in the state and that the National Population Register should be implemented in its 2010 format.
Bhaskar says Nitish has ladoos in both his hands as Tejashwi’s lack of leadership skills has been exposed and a large section of the RJD is also advocating joining hands with Nitish. The BJP, Bhaskar says, had never been so helpless in front of its ally in a state.
Dainik Jagran talks about the communal riots that rocked Northeast Delhi earlier this week. It says the violence was terrible that led to the killing of two dozen people, including a policeman and an Intelligence Bureau officer.
Jagran says the violence didn’t just destroy properties, but Delhi’s social fabric too. It is also ironic that the CAA, which has nothing to do with any citizen of India, led to the killing of so many lives — both who were in favour and against the law.
Amar Ujala talks about air quality index report. The 2019 report states that 21 Indian cities are ‘most polluted’. This indicates that either no action was taken to tackle pollution or that whatever actions were taken, they didn’t have any impact on the environment.
Dainik Bhaskar talks about the Delhi riots. Its says the gap between the two sects in the country is steadily increasing and that communal tensions have increased in the last few years. Bhaskar says the need of the hour is that the head of the country understands the situation. To save India from becoming Syria, it is necessary to convey the message of a strong state.
