Jagran says Scindia departure setback for Congress, Amar Ujala worried about global economy
Amar Ujala comments on External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar rebutting the international criticism against the revocation of Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir, the Citizenship Amendment Act and the Delhi riots. Several countries and global institutions have been critical of the Indian government’s decision to revoke Jammu and Kashmir’s special status but Jaishankar, while speaking at business summit, reminded the United Nations Human Rights Commission of its inactiveness regarding state-sponsored terrorism in Pakistan. The newspaper argues that the Indian government has the right to pass an amendment to the citizenship law. Since India is continuously changing and becoming a global power, it no longer needs to be defensive about its policy decisions.
Dainik Jagran takes note of Prime Minister Narendra Modi giving up his social media accounts to women on the occasion of International Women’s Day. The daily argues that the PM’s efforts are not only laudable but also reflects the message that there is a need to change the society’s attitude towards women. This move will motivate women to work towards transforming the country through their abilities. The newspaper argues that while women have come a long way in the fight for equality, a lot still needs to be done.
Dainik Jagran states that after the arrest of Yes Bank co-founder Rana Kapoor Monday, several facts about the crisis are coming to light. It notes that Priyanka Gandhi sold her father Rajiv Gandhi’s portrait, made by celebrated artist M.F. Hussain, to Kapoor for Rs 2 crore, raising several questions.The newspaper notes that during the UPA government,  political interference in banks was at its peak, which is responsible for the current bank debts. The need of the hour, now, is to ensure that a crisis like the Yes Bank is not repeated.
According to Amar Ujala, coronavirus and the Delhi riots have adversely affected the festival of Holi. The newspaper also laments the loss of traditions during these festivals as well as the business loss suffered due to the coronavirus in China. Even Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah decided to refrain from celebrating Holi this year. Ujala asks why this Holi was not successful in making surroundings harmonious after the brutal communal violence in the city last month.
Dainik Jagran argues that since Jyotiraditya Scindia was a close colleague of Rahul Gandhi, his defection to the BJP is a massive setback for the Congress. The Kamal Nath-led government’s position is now precarious after Scindia’s departure. The newspaper also questions the latter’s move as political opportunism but states that if a BJP and Modi critic was compelled to join the party, Congress should introspect about its failures and try and solve them.
According to Amar Ujala, 22 Congress MLAs resigning from the party, following Scindia’s defection, is a huge crisis for the Kamal Nath government. It notes that the Congress and Kamal Nath were unable to understand the  sentiments of Scindia and other party leaders and thus, the party is not working towards any form of improvement. In such a scenario, if BJP takes advantage of the Congress’ weakness, they can’t be blamed.
Dainik Jagran argues that the coronavirus has led to a global economic crisis. Beginning from China, the virus has adversely affected South Korea, Japan, Italy and Iran. India, too, is suffering from this crisis but the Indian government has decided to isolate them from the rest of the world. The newspaper states that while it impacts the economy, human life should take precedence. It notes that an increase in the number of people infected by the virus is a big worry for the whole world. Thus, people should cooperate and take precautions against the virus. There is also a need to strengthen our medical infrastructure.
