Distrust between Hindus and Muslims won’t help Covid fight, last thing Modi govt would want
At a time when the stress levels of managing the killer coronavirus pandemic are highest, trouble from a flare-up between communities is the last thing the Narendra Modi government would want. The call for boycott of Muslim traders and street vendors in some sections of Indian society comes months after former JNU student Sharjeel Imam made a call to “cut off Assam from the rest of India” during the anti-CAA protests.
Such distrust between communities won’t help the country’s fight against the coronavirus. But it’s important to understand where these differences stem from.
BJP MLA @Brijbhushanbjp threatens Muslim vegetable vendor in front of his kid. 'बस्ती में दिख नही जाना तुम लोग, नही तोह मार मार के ठीक कर देंगे, मुसलमान होकय अपना नाम झूट बोलते हो'. News link : https://t.co/PEM05T6S6k pic.twitter.com/PTS590pkg2
— Mohammed Zubair (@zoo_bear) April 29, 2020

The sudden increase in cases of animosity towards Muslims can be directly attributed to the Tablighi Jamaat congregation at Delhi’s Nizamuddin Markaz. The meeting was called off but the participants who had congregated were allowed to return to their respective hometowns all over India — a serious error by the administration, which couldn’t envisage the fallout, both socially and in terms of the spread of coronavirus.
Also read: Covid lockdown has ended only opposition politics in India. BJP’s shop is very much open
This incident sparked a strong social reaction and combined with the fact that lockdown was the only effective solution to the Covid-19 crisis, any violation of the lockdown was perceived as an anti-social act. When such issues come to be judged by the public, logic and reasoning most likely take a back seat.
On top of social media messages, unrestricted news items and videos of highly despicable and contemptible treatment of medical workers, doctors and nurses, attacks on police personnel and stone-pelting on medico-social workers were freely reported. Some of the incidents were found to be unrelated to the current crisis while some news and videos were fake and doctored. But when credible information is not available in time, such highly enraging messages gain credibility.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
It is in this background that one must look at the boycott calls, which came from random sources and whose writ does not run beyond a limited geography and sphere of influence. Given their penchant for quick and ugly craving for publicity, it is not unusual for such elements to hog limelight through issues that attract the attention of the “man bites dog” media.
It would be worthwhile recalling the sane words of Sarsanghchalak of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), Mohan Bhagwat, who emphasised on the need for concern for national interest to override petty political consideration. At an event in Nagpur on 26 April, Bhagwat spoke about the importance of an inclusive approach and to treat the entire population as one unit where no one is left out of the relief work.
His assertion that the mistake of one individual should not result in creating a distance from the entire community assumes great significance in the light of increasing bogey of Islamophobia and calls to boycott Muslims. Coming from the highest office of the RSS, these words of advice should be taken seriously by those who attempt to vitiate the atmosphere by their irresponsible statements and illogical suggestions.
Also read: Covid an excuse to push Indian Muslims out of informal sector jobs. Apartheid the next step
Ironically, trade boycott seems to be the go-to measure of even countries that seek to act in a retributive manner against behaviours inimical to their national or religious beliefs and interests. China initiated a boycott of Japanese goods in 1930 following an attack on its shores. Most recently in 2012, the Chinese imposed a ban on Japanese goods after the boat collision incident in Senkaku Islands took an ugly turn, bringing the two countries on the verge of conflict.
Boycott of South Africa as a punishment for apartheid is well recoded in recent history. Then there was the boycott of Danish goods by some Muslim-majority countries following the publication of controversial cartoons by Jyllands-Posten newspaper in 2005. Even the US had officially announced a boycott of French goods during the Iraq war. The several US sanctions against Iran over the past four decades, against India after the second nuclear test and against Myanmar military leaders are only some of the boycotts at international level that have ultimately proved to be counter-productive.
But in all adverse scenarios, the social bonding and unity has withstood the test of time. To achieve that, though, the responsible and saner elements in both HIndu and Muslim communities must come together and look for more opportunities to impress upon everyone the need for unity, especially so in a crisis situation like the current one.
The author is a member of the National Executive Committee of the BJP and former editor of Organiser. Views are personal.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Mr Chari, your  homilies  are well taken but as Executive member of BJP , please inform the public what your party has done against people like Kapil Mishra, Parvesh Verma and Anurag  Thakur  for inciting the majority   population. That will surely help in building the trust. Otherwise , these are empty words.
RSS Chief Mohan Bahgwat’s comments are welcome and much needed. But it’s mere lip service unless he puts those thoughts into action  within his own organisation.
RSS has been the primary spreader of hate against Muslims in India. Even people who do not know any Muslims, nor live near them have clear opinions that Muslims are like this, and like that. Credit for this goes singularly to the RSS. Why must the acts of some Muslims a few hundred years ago drive your opinion of them today?!
Also violence – such training is part of RSS, and must change. And change is always welcome. It’s a sign that you’re alive and not becoming archaic.
The BJP under Modi has torn India’s social fabric apart. The cohesiveness that had been evolving since independance has been halted, and he has taken Indian society a few deacdes back. The bigoted, superstitious and narrow-minded thoughts that people were becoming ashamed to voice have made a comeback. They are now voiced with pride. His government is doing ISI’s job for free. Oh sorry – I mean for votes!
