India could need 33 lakh dexamethasone pills by 15 Aug, govt takes stock with pharma firms
New Delhi: The Modi government has reached out to the makers of dexamethasone — the first drug which has shown efficacy in saving lives against Covid-19 — to check the availability of stocks across the country, ThePrint has learnt.
In a letter written by drug price and availability watchdog, National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA), the government has directed manufacturers to ensure the adequate production of three drugs — dexamethasone, methylprednisolone and enoxaparin — which are now part of clinical treatment protocol of Covid-19.
While dexamethasone and methylprednisolone are corticosteroids, which are used for anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects in Covid-19 treatment, enoxaparin (popularly known as Heparin) is an anticoagulant that helps prevent the formation of blood clots induced by the virus.
The letter, accessed by ThePrint, has been sent to the managing directors, chief executive officers (CEOs) of pharmaceutical firms producing these drugs, including Sun Pharma, Sanofi, Cipla and Zydus Cadila.
Based on the estimates of Director General of Health Services (DGHS) — an officer who renders technical advice on all medical and public health matters to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare — the letter said, the requirement of dexamethasone in India could be around 33 lakh tablets (6 mg) for period upto 15 August.
The requirement of methylprednisolone is pegged around 1.38 lakh vials whereas the requirement of enoxaparin is estimated around 30.15 lakh vials of 40 mg strength and 14.07 lakh vials of 60 mg strength by 31 July.
Also read:Antibody therapies take the spotlight as ‘Plan B’ to treat coronavirus
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The letter directed companies to “ensure the production of above mentioned drugs in adequate quantity (as indicated by DGHS) and to take proactive steps to maintain adequate stock and ensure supply across the country”.
It further added, “make available adequate stocks across the country and whenever and wherever short supply is reported.” (Sic)
It has asked companies to “immediately intimate details” regarding production or sale of above mentioned drugs during the last two years (FY 2018-19, FY 2019-20).
The other details include “stock lying with the companies till date, production schedule for next six months, details of suppliers from whom the companies are sourcing active pharmaceutical ingredients (API), any problems in supply of APIs and details of procurement orders placed by state governments”.
According to the four-page letter, the top supplier of dexamethasone is Zydus Cadila with 80 per cent market share, while for enoxaparin, Bharat Serums and Sanofi capture over 37 per cent of the total market. For methylprednisolone, US-based Pfizer rules the market with a 43.4 per cent market share.
The letter is also marked to State Drug Controllers, who are further ordered to “issue necessary directions to these manufacturers to ensure the availability of medicines across the country”.
