204 deaths on 1 June to 553 on 13 July, India’s mortality rate 2.6% now — latest Covid numbers
New Delhi: Even as daily Covid cases in India inch closer every day to the 30,000 mark, it is the daily deaths that have shown a significant growth in the past month. Between 1 June and now, it has more than doubled — from 204 deaths to 553.
While states like Maharashtra and Delhi have seen the highest mortalities, the mortality rate by states tells a different story, with Gujarat topping that chart. India’s mortality rate stands at 2.6% now.
On a day the Government of India said only 22 states are doing more tests than the WHO-mandated 140 tests per million per day, India’s overall testing numbers continued to rise, as did the active cases and recoveries. Gujarat and West Bengal are notable omissions among the states who are testing enough.

The graph of daily deaths doesn’t seem to have climbed that much barring a spurt on 16 June. In reality, however, the casualties have been mounting and what is more worrying is there are vast disparities in how states are performing.

The graph of state-wise mortality rate gives an impression of how states have performed. For clarity, the chart here shows only those states that have a mortality rate of 1% and above. This graph shows why despite lower numbers, states like West Bengal and Gujarat remain worry points. Tamil Nadu despite the high numbers figures in the top half of the graph (only states with above 1% mortality featured)
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 

The total number of active cases went up by about 10,000 even though 28,498 fresh cases of Covid infection were reported across the country in the last 24 hours.

The total tests conducted in the country in the last 24 hours stood at 2,86,247. India is currently doing about 201 tests per million population per day against the WHO recommendation of 140.

The sample positivity rate in the country stands at 9.9% now. This, when the testing base had been widened in the past weeks, may indicate a greater spread of the disease.

The recoveries remain the sole good news in the grim Covid tale. In the last 24 hours, 1,79,89 people have recovered. And this is why the rise in active cases is not as steep as the rise in daily positives.

The total cases now stand at 906752. India took 109 days to reach its first lakh covid cases and just three to move from 8 lakh to 9 lakh

Delhi: With 1,13,740 confirmed cases and 3,411 deaths, the national capital remains among the big four. But just these numbers don’t tell the complete Delhi story. Most experts now believe it may have passed the peak at least for now.
 

Gujarat: The state’s numbers tell the story of why it tops the chart on mortality rate. There have been 42,722 confirmed cases and 2,055 deaths so far.

Maharashtra: The state, along with Tamil Nadu, accounts for 50% of all Covid cases in the country. It also has the highest number of deaths and the second highest mortality rate at 4.02%.

Tamil Nadu: This southern state shoulders the biggest Covid burden after Maharashtra, but both its recovery rate and death rate are better than the national average of 97% vs 96%.
