We have to learn to live with the virus, says govt as India crosses 56,000 coronavirus cases
New Delhi: As India’s coronavirus doubling rate fluctuated between 12 and 10 days in just a two-day period, the Modi government Friday told the country that “we have to learn to live with the virus”.
“Two days ago, our doubling rate was 12. Then, a day ago, we suddenly saw an increase in the number of cases… It is important that today when we are talking about relaxation, when we are talking about return of migrant workers, we have a great challenge and we need to understand that we have to learn to live with the virus,” said joint secretary Lav Agarwal, the spokesperson for the government, during a press briefing.
Doubling rate indicates the speed at which the infection is spreading.
Agarwal urged people to imbibe the government guidelines as a behavioural change in their lives.
As of Friday morning, India’s total number of coronavirus cases stands at 56,342, of which 37,916 are active. In the last 24 hours, the total number of cases has increased by 3,390, of which 2,051 cases have been reported in Maharashtra, Gujarat and Delhi combined.
However, when asked a question about whether these states are now seeing ‘community transmission’ of the novel coronavirus, Agarwal said, “There has been a drastic increase in the number of cases in a few states… It is important the state government and the government coordinate in the containment efforts to stop this increase.”
Also read: Scientists develop sensor that can help smartphones detect coronavirus in 60 seconds
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
According to health ministry data, 1,273 patients have been cured in the last 24 hours, and the recovery rate increased to 29.36 per cent from Monday’s 27.52 per cent.
“There is a constant increase in the number of cured patients, which is positive news… One among every three hospitalised patients has been cured,” Agarwal said.
Of the Covid patients who are under treatment, 3.2 per cent are on oxygen support, 4.2 per cent are in ICUs, and 1.1 per cent are on ventilator support.
The ministry also announced that 216 districts across the country are Covid-free; 42 districts haven’t reported a case in 28 days, 29 districts haven’t seen one in 21 days, 36 districts in 14 days, and 46 districts haven’t reported a case in seven days.
Agarwal said that the list of red, orange and green zones released last week will be updated soon based on the new data. On 30 April, the government had put 130 districts in red zones, 284 in orange zones and 319 in green zones.
Also read: R0 at 1.27 but experts say India yet to hit Covid peak, lockdown alone can’t end pandemic
Meanwhile, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has initiated the second phase of trials for plasma therapy for Covid-19 patients.
“ICMR will assess the safety and efficacy of convalescent plasma through clinical trials in 21 hospitals,” Agarwal said.
However, the ICMR list released Friday featured 28 hospitals — five each in Gujarat and Maharashtra, four each in Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu, three in Madhya Pradesh, two each in Uttar Pradesh and Telangana, and one each in Karnataka, Chandigarh and Punjab.
Also read: Govt asks pharma firms when remdesivir, the big hope against Covid, can be made in India
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
