‘We didn’t do enough’ — AIIMS faculty and students say after suicides by doctors
New Delhi: Over the last two months, the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in the national capital has seen six suicides, including that of three doctors.
The latest case came to light Friday when the decomposed body of Dr Mohit Singhla, a 40-year-old research officer of paediatrics, was retrieved by the police from his Gautam Nagar home after neighbours complained of foul smell.
The prestigious medical institute has dealt with student suicides on a regular basis over the years, but the recent spate of deaths — between 5 June and 14 August — amid the raging Covid-19 pandemic has sounded the alarm among students and faculty.
Earlier this week, the institute’s faculty association wrote to AIIMS Director Dr Randeep Guleria, saying there was a “need to collectively think and work to provide an enabling environment for the students to prosper”.
“We have appealed to the administration asking them to make this their top priority,” Dr Rakesh Yadav, president of the association, told ThePrint. “Suicide is a multi-factoral problem, and it’s difficult to say what’s causing this string of suicides. It’s an indication that we’ve failed somewhere.”
Since June, three patients admitted to AIIMS — including journalist Tarun Sisodia — also died by suicide on the premises, for unknown reasons.
Also read: After month-long downward Covid trend, Delhi sees worrying rise in cases, hospitalisations
Mohit Singhla was a 1998 AIIMS topper who took on the job of a research officer in the paediatrics department. His interests were in tuberculosis and HIV. 
In his alleged suicide note, he wrote, “What will I do living till I am 60-70 years old,” adding that he was taking his life out of choice as he “cannot hide his mental state any longer”.
The Delhi Police is verifying the authenticity of the note. 
“He was a very nice man. Most people in AIIMS are too busy to help out, but if you ever needed help with a research project he would volunteer to help,” a junior resident from the paediatrics department, who didn’t wish to be named, told ThePrint. “It’s terribly sad. He didn’t let on that he had a mental health problem.”
Singhla’s death follows that of a 22-year-old student, Vikas G., who allegedly jumped off a roof on 10 August. Vikas had been admitted to the psychiatry ward earlier and was under treatment for a mental health issue. 
Earlier, a resident doctor, Anurag Kumar, died by suicide. He was also receiving treatment at the psychiatry department. 
“They were both being strictly monitored. Despite that, they managed to take the step. It means we didn’t do enough, and we need to work to make sure this doesn’t happen again. We don’t know what’s causing this sudden spurt — it’s difficult to say,” Adarsh Pratap Singh, president of the Resident Doctors Association, told ThePrint. 
On 19 April, a female Dalit resident doctor of dentistry attempted suicide allegedly because she faced caste-based discrimination at the hands of a senior doctor.
Kumar had written a blog post about his battles with depression before he jumped to his death on 10 July — exactly a month before Vikas G., who was also from a Dalit community, ended his life. 
Also read: Lav Agarwal, face of Modi govt’s Covid fight, himself tests positive for coronavirus
ThePrint spoke to a number of doctors at the institute, and all of them said the pressure to perform can be immense. 
“It can be a lot of pressure because everyone who comes is a bright student. There is continuous academic pressure when you join AIIMS, so it is easy to be overwhelmed. This can be compounded by their mental illness, if they have any,” said Singh. 
A senior resident at psychiatry department, who didn’t wish to be named, said the pressure was even more if students are from minority backgrounds, or if they are not from Delhi.
“There have been many complaints about caste-based discrimination, use of language, and even nepotism, but nothing meaningful has come out of it. People who come from outside have a particularly difficult time adjusting to this environment,” he said.
“These issues need to be systematically addressed. Issuing a statement is not enough,” he added.
Complaints of caste-based harassment and suicide have remained an issue for AIIMS even in the past. Apart from such cases, the institute reportedly sees at least one suicide a year.
In view of the pandemic, the institute has set up a mental health helpline for its doctors.
Also read: Some Covid-19 antibodies could last in recovered patients for at least 6 months, study finds
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
Why news media is in crisis & How you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And have just turned three.
At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous and questioning journalism. Please click on the link below. Your support will define ThePrint’s future.
Support Our Journalism 
The problem with general category people is their ignorance about the reality of our country.. they think everything should be merit based. I would like them to come out of their glamorous city and visit rural and border regions of our country, see their living condition and empathize.. people who framed constitution and stood for reservation were not fool and understood the vast gap between rural and urban India and the discrimination inflicted by caste system. Unlike western world our country is not socially equal society and india is not only about delhi mumbai or other big cities..when this is a way to uplift all section of the society why do people have problem?
Never thought we will ever be able to see the caste discrimination at aiims
It’s not good coz reservation was the need of past and is also at present, coz many of the dalit aren’t educated till now but can do something to empower themselves and the community if got a chance
Precious lives being lost. Mental health should be the foremost concern for allconcerned. Never underestimate the power of mind to construct or destruct.
Don’t please stick to the caste . The reason behind it may be peer pressure on academic or some other reason.  Today the students are facing lots of problems in maintaining their mental health.
All Medical institutes are suffering because of Bullying, in which vertical bullying is more prominent.
I don’t know why no body speaks about it.
Yelling and commenting on personalities is a very common phenomenon in medical colleges especially in Premiar institutes.
It is independent of any biases.
U guys never leave an opportunity to make everything a caste based issue,  and do dalit lives matter more than others? Looks like it, as u specifically mentioned their caste.  Cheap journalism
Appreciated
