R value down to 1.11, recovery rate 63.02%, active cases 3.01 lakh — latest Covid data
New Delhi: The ‘R’ value for Covid-19, which measures the rate at which the infection is spreading in India, is at an all-time low of 1.11.
The number has been on a downward trajectory for weeks now, having touched a high of 1.83 in April. However, it showed a sudden spurt last week and for the first time in three months there was actually a week-on-week increase. This week, it seems to be back on its earlier path and now stands at its lowest ever — a rare good news amid the daily spiralling numbers.
Testing has been going up but so has the sample positivity rate, signalling a spurt in the spread of infection. This is a number that may become a cause for worry in the coming days, as can be the death numbers that too seem to be on the rise.

The R value measures the rate of spread of the infection. The good news is that even as daily numbers rose, R has come down significantly to 1.11. It is when it dips below one that the pandemic can be said to have slowed.

More than 50,000 fresh cases were recorded over the weekend. But over 35,000 recoveries in the two days ensured the total active cases in the country currently stands at 3,01,609.

We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The number of tests conducted shows a steady pattern with a weekly drop on Sundays. This number has more than doubled in the last five weeks, but there may be a need to push it up even further.

The positivity rate is an important metric because it gives an idea about the spread of a disease. The figure has been on the rise. The weekly average now stands at 9.8%. In the first week of June, it was 7.14%. The figure for Monday was a high 13% because of a dip in testing on Sunday.


A total of 18,850 people were cured in the last 24 hours, taking the total cumulative number of recovered cases among Covid-19 patients to 5,53,470. The recovery rate has further improved to 63.02% Monday. As many as 19 states have a recovery rate higher than the national average.

The total cases in the country seem poised to reach the million mark this week. On Monday, the total was 8,78,254.

Delhi: The national capital has a total of 1,12,494 Covid cases so far. Interestingly, Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia had predicted some time back that the number in the city would be 5.5 lakh by July-end. That seems to have been averted as daily cases continue to come down. On Sunday, 1,573 fresh cases were reported.

Maharashtra: The numbers look overwhelming as over 2.5 lakh of the approximately 8.78 lakh cases in the country belong to this state alone. It has also seen 10,289 deaths.

Gujarat: Gujarat continues to be among the top four states in terms of Covid burden, even though three fourths of the patients are now cured. The state has seen 2,045 deaths so far.

Tamil Nadu: Despite its position as the state with the second highest Covid numbers, Tamil Nadu remains an outlier among the high-burden states both in its testing numbers and mortality rate, which is 1.4%.


The testing numbers of Maharashtra and Delhi have remained stagnant for some days now, while Tamil Nadu continues to up its game. Gujarat is still testing the least among the high-burden states.
