How Sweden’s ‘model’ Covid strategy collapsed due to arrogance in scientific approach
New Delhi: Long held as the ideal model for fighting coronavirus, the rising death toll in Sweden is testament to the fact that even countries that rely on science and have the best public health systems can suffer if they get arrogant with the virus, ThePrint Editor-in-Chief Shekhar Gupta said in episode 488 of ‘Cut The Clutter’.
With about 4,562 deaths and over 41,800 people infected, Sweden has turned into one of the worst-faring developed countries.
Gupta said that Sweden approached the virus with a sense of arrogance thinking that they know best and now, the country is paying for it.
“A dictator can be arrogant with the virus, a democrat can be arrogant with the virus and a modern rich, socialist system — relying on science — can also be arrogant with the virus. But with this virus, you need humility,” said Gupta.
For quite some time, Sweden has been held out as a ‘model’ of a number of things.
The country is held as a model of great socialism. It also sets an example as a country with the finest public health system in the world.
Lately, Sweden has been considered the model for dealing with the coronavirus crisis.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“Sweden followed a method that was different from the rest of the world, and particularly different from the rest of Europe,” Gupta said.
The country, which has a high per capita income of $58,000, has a very low population density of about 25 people per square kilometre.
Sweden decided early on, when countries were debating over how to deal with it, that they will not go for a countrywide lockdown.
Instead, they put in place voluntary social distancing and bans on non-essential travel. Social gatherings were restricted to under 50 people, and people were advised not to visit old age care homes.
“India decided on a draconian full lockdown for three weeks. Three more weeks after that, it is slowly opening up. Now we’re opening up a little bit more so six weeks of complete draconian lockdown,” Gupta said.
On the other hand, some countries decided to have a partial lockdown, for example Pakistan.
Countries like the US and the UK, initially thought that there was no need for lockdown, but soon enough they realised it was not working.
With the trend of infectivity in UK, it was thought that the country would have been better off staying with the initial idea proposed by Prime Minister Boris Johnson and his advisors of going for herd immunity.
They wanted to achieve this herd immunity by asking old people to stay at home while letting young people go out and get infected.
“A few will die but in the process, a large enough percentage will get immune and thereby they will give the entire population herd immunity,” said Gupta.
“Britain initially started on this plan, but when infections went up and the death toll started rising, they lost their nerve and went back to the idea for lockdown,” he added.
Brazil was held as the worst example, where President Jair Bolsonaro dismissed the disease as a ‘little flu’.
On the other hand, South Korea was a country that was held out as a model for the whole world. It tested a large number of people and was able to block the virus very fast.
The country employed one person to track every contact. Any contact that disappeared from sight or was not traceable for even a few hours was fined $10,000.
The other model that was seen to have worked was New Zealand. In fact, the success of the country started a whole clamour about Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern, with people taking to social media hailing her as the one who should be the leader of the world, said Gupta.
Sweden followed the advice of its state epidemiologist Anders Tegnell who said that there is no need for a nationwide lockdown.
The country trusted its citizens to follow social distancing guidelines and put some restrictions on social gatherings, intercity travel, and visits to care homes for older people.
“It did look like for some time that they were doing all right,” Gupta said.
Compared to the UK, Finland, Denmark, Norway, Belgium, France, Italy — all of its neighbouring countries that had imposed a lockdown — Sweden seemed to be doing much better.
“Now, I’d say that the Swedish model is unraveling. And there’s a reason why I talk about Sweden and why it’s relevant for us,” he said.
Sweden went with the advice from its well-reputed chief epidemiologist and bent against the flow. They went in the direction opposite of all developed country peers.
“Today Sweden has had 4,542 deaths in a population of one crore. In fact, if you just extrapolate this to India’s population, for example, it would be equal 5,56,000 deaths,” Gupta said.
This is despite the fact that Sweden is 30 times richer than India and with a much lower population density. It has the world’s best public health care system, the finest doctors and the most aware population.
All these mathematical models of epidemiological studies on viral spread were based on viruses that we had known earlier, this is a new kind of virus. And perhaps these mathematical models don’t apply to this virus.
The death toll in Denmark, Finland and Norway is 580, 321, and 237 respectively. Each country has a population of about 50 lakh — about half the population of Sweden.
If the European countries are compared based on deaths per million, Belgium is the highest with 833. UK is the second highest at 597. Spain is the third worst at 580. Italy comes fourth with 556 and the fifth worst is Sweden with 446 per million and still rising.
“Other countries have had their lockdowns, they are opening up. They’ve suffered the economic damage in those lockdowns, but they are now opening up and their economies are opening up and their fatality rates are not dropping quite steeply,” said Gupta.
In Sweden, on the other hand, the lockdown is still not there. They decided to go the herd immunity way. Their fatality rates per million are catching up with the worst in the world and the deaths are not declining.
They’ve already suffered economic damage. Sweden’s finance minister Magdalena Anderson has now said that its GDP decline this year will be about 7 per cent. According to her, this will be the worst year of Sweden’s economy since World War II.
“The world’s most likely country to succeed with herd immunity has shown you that herd immunity has been a disaster for it,” he added.
Tegnell, himself, recently admitted that the model has gone wrong. Earlier, in April, he had told the BBC that the high death toll was because old age homes were not able to stop the virus from coming in there but this does not disqualify their strategy.
“So once you get wedded to an idea, it’s very difficult to break off. And that’s when you continue to compound your errors,” Gupta said.
Tegnell later told Swedish media that if they were to encounter the same disease again, knowing exactly what we know about it today, they would settle on something in between what Sweden did and what the rest of the world has done.
Norway’s public health chief Frode Forland also said that Sweden got caught up too much into historical models of viruses.
Tegnell’s predecessor Anika Lindy, said that Sweden’s response was all wrong.
According to her, Sweden should have announced an early lockdown and care homes should have been sealed. They should also have been more intensive in testing and tracing.
“Sometimes you can become a prisoner to dogma or ideology. Dogma in science is also bad. Politicians who don’t listen to scientists go wrong, but politicians who only listen to scientists also go wrong, because science is not absolute,” said Gupta.
“There are different points of view in science so leaders have to listen to everybody and then arrive at a thoughtful decision,” he added.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
I remember reading Swedish registered every death as Covid death during pandemic.is it true?
It’s seem to early to make judgements, Mr Sekhar Gupta should bring the theme with science eyes and not with obvious judgment. The virus still there and we have to wait the end to see which country did the best job. Here in India, I can see such damage in poor area and it will get worst  because they don’t have food and consequently no immunity. The funny is the news are scared to tell the true in India. Or it is just a government who is controlling the media and censuring the blogs, you tubers who are complaint the less compatibility.
Utterly nonsense. I can only imagine the world political pressure coming to bare on Sweden for refusing to tow the line. 10 million people live there and i believe they have the highest percentage in the world living in nursing homes at 19%. Reduce the death total accordlingly and recalculate. Lowest percentage on the planet, which i predicted at the outset based on political deciet and lies dating to March 17 that ive found so far. No other virus in history has ever been tracked this much so you cant compare, but even so it shows to be no worse than any other. Look for yourselves at how many last year contracted, were hospitalized, and how many died and compare those numbers. Ridiculous how people are allowing this to happen. The same tactics are being used to justify both Gulf Wars and Afghanistan. Bin Ladin is dead. Did America leave? No and now the children of those first deployed are over there. Sweden beginning to mature as a culture and is therefore a threat to everyone else, making them look bad. Abandoning Socialism and by angrily refusing to labeled Socialist they now have marked themselves a target.
There were much more issues behind the Swedish decision which are completely missing from the article, like the social impact of a lockdown. The 7% recession is mostly caused by the European closures, on the other hand many small businesses have survived without bankruptcy which means smaller need for financial aid and less debt. There is also the question of reopen but when. Most of Europe has seen an increase in infection upon reopening. The death toll could be misleading, too as Sweden treats every death with minimal suspicion to Corona as Corona death, while other countries are tricking with the numbers. There’s a New York Times article on that issue. And at last there is a moral question. Countries will go in tremendous debts to get their economies back on track. Our grandchildren will pay for that, too. The states have never ever done their best to save everyone’s life. There are several terminal illnesses and funding researches for such a debt could have saved 1000 times more lives then we save now. But we didn’t get in debt for them. Are those who are endangered by Corona worth more than those who died in let’s say cancer? After race or religion is the next classification of people by possible cause of death? We do everything to save one from Corona but let many more die on other causes. Disgusting
This article is nonsense..!! The writer has to talk to Swedish resident and not somebody else. We don’t need your view..!!
Sweden has learned a great lesson from this. Many Swedes now know how dishonest, manipulative, and vile much of the European MSM are, and many Swedes will have more critical thinking in the future.
Why need for this opinion artical.  When same thing explains better by shekhar ji . In cut the clutter. And ever author of this article not adding any new thing just quoting Shekharji
So less deaths,  no lockdowns, hmm seems like a much better outcome, and all the countries death rates are rising and netherlands is a close 6th. Over 4100 of their deaths so far are over 70, 1181 over 90, lockdowns are a failure, agenda driven groupthink, fueled by blowhard megaphones like this
So less deaths,  no lockdowns, hmm seems like a much better outcome, and all the countries death rates are rising and netherlands is a close 6th. Over 4100 of their deaths so far are over 70, 1181 over 90, lockdowns are a failure, agenda driven groupthink, fueled by blowhard megaphones like this.
This is not really what had happened in Sweden. We where on the curve mid April (most deaths 15th of April and most hospitalizations 25th of April) and since that we have had a steady drop of deaths and people needing care.
The number of new reported cases has not gone down but that’s mostly because we have start testing a lot more and catching many more mild cases now. The testing among health workers to keep the infection out of hospitals etc has ramped up good now.
Our excess mortality is down at normal levels since a week back. We still still have people dying with corona but we also count all people with the virus as covid deaths even if they have other death causes.
Our hospitals was never owerwhelmed. That was the main strategy. 
To be able to critizise Swedens way of handling this you actually have to know about what has happened here and how we have handled it. Not just guess and go by rumors.
There are mistakes and of course everything is not perfect, but what is written here is mostly wrong or with insufficient information around it.
