Foreign Secretary Shringla calls top US official on ways to ‘counter & control’ Covid-19
New Delhi: In an effort to establish a constant dialogue with the US on Covid-19, Foreign Secretary Harsh Vardhan Shringla spoke to US Deputy Secretary of State Stephen E. Biegun to discuss ways to “counter and control” the growing challenges of the pandemic.
According to sources, both sides exchanged views on the current situation in the world, as both countries see a rise in the number of Covid-19 cases and deaths.
India and the US also discussed ways “to further enhance their cooperation to counter and control the pandemic, including through the development of novel therapies and prophylactics against Covid-19, and ensuring availability of essential medicines, diagnostic and medical equipment, and sharing of best practices and information,” a source told ThePrint.
Also Read: Aap chronology samajhiye: Did Modi buckle under Trump’s pressure on HCQ for COVID-19?
Shringla’s call comes after External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar held a telephonic conversation with Secretary of State Mike Pompeo on 6 April. Prime Minster Narendra Modi had spoken to US President Donald Trump before that.
During his phone call with Modi, Trump had urged New Delhi to send shipments of anti-malaria drug hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), which is one of the drugs being studied as a cure for Covid-19. However, the export of the two key drugs, HCQ and paracetamol, has been put on the restrictive list by the Indian government, which means they will be exported on a case-to-case basis.
“With regard to paracetamol and hydroxychloroquine, they will be kept in a licenced category and their demand position would be continuously monitored. However, the stock position could allow our companies to meet the export commitments that they had contracted,” Anurag Srivastava, spokesperson for the Ministry of External Affairs, said Tuesday.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
On 4 April, the Modi government had put a blanket ban on the export of HCQ, but later, partially lifted it. Some of the countries that have asked for shipments of HCQ and paracetamol are the US, the UK, Brazil, Germany, France, Spain and SAARC countries.
“In view of the humanitarian aspects of the pandemic, it has been decided that India would licence paracetamol and HCQ in appropriate quantities to all our neighbouring countries who are dependent on our capabilities. We will also be supplying these essential drugs to some nations who have been particularly badly affected by the pandemic,” Srivastava added.
