Indian zoos and national parks on Covid-19 alert after tiger tests positive in US
New Delhi: The environment ministry Monday asked all states and union territories to closely monitor zoos, national parks and tiger reserves to prevent a possible outbreak of the novel coronavirus among animals after a New York zoo reported that a tiger has tested positive.
The National Veterinary Services Laboratories in the US confirmed that a tiger in the Bronx zoo has contracted SARS-CoV-2, which causes the Covid-19 infection. Samples from the mammal were taken and tested after several lions and tigers at the zoo showed symptoms of respiratory illness.
This is the world’s first reported instance of a tiger being infected with the novel coronavirus.
Also read: Did pangolins transmit coronavirus to humans? Could be, but scientists still not sure
In a circular dated 6 April, the Central Zoo Authority asked all states to monitor animals in their zoos and take immediate preventive measures to stop the transmission and spread of the virus from humans to animals and vice versa.
Chief wildlife wardens of all states have been advised to remain on highest possible alert and watch animals on a 24×7 basis, using CCTV footage to monitor any abnormal behaviour or symptoms.
Among the measures ordered, animal handlers will not be allowed near animals without safety gear while the sick animals will be isolated and quarantined.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The circular states that carnivorous mammals — especially felines, ferret and primates — need to be carefully monitored.
Fortnightly samples of suspect cases will have to be sent to the designated animal health institutes for testing. These are the National Institute of High Security Animal Disease (NIHSAD) in Bhopal, the National Research Centre on Equines (NRCE), Hisar, and the Centre for Animal Disease Research and Diagnostic (CADRAD), Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI), in Bareilly.
In a separate circular, the environment ministry’s Forest and Climate Change’s Wildlife Division has also warned of the possibility of the spread of the virus among animals in the country’s national parks, sanctuaries and tiger reserves.
In view of this, chief wildlife wardens have been advised to constitute a task force or rapid action force with field managers and veterinary doctors to manage the situation.
This would include creating a round-the-clock reporting mechanism that will allow for swift management if any cases are noticed.
The wardens have also been asked to set up “essential services for emergency treatment of animals and their safe release back to their natural habitats, as and when required”.
