J&K High court stays cutting down distinctive 16-20 million Russian poplar trees
Srinagar:The Jammu and Kashmir High Court has stayed its own 2015 order  directing the civil administration to cut down Russian Poplar trees in the newly created union territory. 
Authorities had begun cutting down the trees stating that the pollen generated from the female variety could act as a carrier of the Covid-19 virus.
The court Friday asked the J&K administration to constitute a committee of experts within four days, to ascertain the desirability of cutting down Russian poplars on war footing basis.
The court direction comes days after the J&K civil administration cited the 2015 order and directed district authorities to carry out massive felling of the female variety of the tree that number anywhere between 16-20 million across the region.
ThePrint had reported on 8 April that domain experts as well as politicians believed that the decision to cut lakhs of trees would invariably result in a massive ecological and economic disaster. The high court order mentions ThePrint story on the felling of the Russian Poplars. 
The following day, on April 9, a Valley-based advocate, Habeeb Iqbal, wrote to the chief justice seeking judicial intervention.
“It is contended by Mr Habeel Iqbal that the indiscriminate felling of the trees (reported to be in several thousands) has severe adverse economic and ecological impact, which may be irreversible,” the high court said in its order.  “We have perused these media reports. Certain very pertinent issues have been pointed out.” 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“Significantly, a grave error is pointed out which is to the effect that female poplar trees have been directed by the authorities to be felled on account of the “pollen” generated by them. This by itself is a basic mistake,” the court added. “Pollen is generated by the male of the species and not by the female tree. Therefore felling of the female of the species would not have any impact.”
Also read: J&K targets Russian poplars in Covid-19 fight, experts worry about ‘ecological disaster’
The high court had on 3 April, however, directed the Health and Medical Education secretary to examine the impact of pollen released by the trees and their ability to carry the Covid-19 virus.
Following that, the J&K administration ordered lopping/felling of the trees in both privately-owned and government land. The government first ordered that the branches of the poplars be trimmed but subsequent press releases from various district administrations stated that authorities had been asked to “axe” the trees. 
In its Friday order, the high court clarified that it had passed no direction regarding the felling of trees on 3 April.
“We make it clear that in our order dated 3rd April 2020, we had left the decision and action to be taken by the secretary, Health and Medical Education and had passed no direction regarding felling of the trees,” the court said.
“We were informed on 3rd April, 2020, by Mr. Shafqat Nazir, advocate, that there were previous court orders of 2015 with regard to felling of poplars. If this is the position, we today direct that any prior order directing felling of the poplar trees would be kept in abeyance till the above proceedings of the Committee and consideration directed today are completed, placed before us and further orders passed by us,” the order further stated.
Also read: The male, female and pollen behind J&K order to chop ‘Covid-19’ trees
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
