Should IPL be played in empty stadiums or cancelled due to coronavirus pandemic, travel ban?
The World Health Organization Wednesday declared coronavirus a pandemic, following which the government suspended most travel visas. The virus has caused disruptions in the sports world too. While the India Open badminton tournament will now be played without spectators, the NBA has suspended its entire season. The virus now casts its shadow on the IPL, the T20 cricketing extravaganza, which is scheduled to begin from 29 March.
ThePrint asks: Should IPL be played in empty stadiums or cancelled due to coronavirus pandemic, travel ban?
Pradeep Magazine
 Senior sports journalist and columnist
The IPL tournament is held every year in India. The Board of Control for Cricket in India has a lot riding in terms of money and time because it has a limited window for this tournament. Chances are that if the tournament gets postponed, it may not be organised this year altogether. The organisers are concerned, but they should also be aware of the consequences of not following the government’s advisory.
The best course of action would be not to think of money or profit and focus on concerns regarding people’s lives. I suggest the organisers should postpone the tournament for their own and the country’s good.
The Olympics is the biggest sporting event, but there are talks about deferring it too. However, the Tokyo games are still a few months away.
This year’s IPL tournament is just seventeen days away. Heavens will not fall if it gets postponed. IPL matches see thousands of people flocking to the stadiums and players traveling day in and day out. Given the government’s travel advisory, I don’t think India will be able to host the tournament.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Jaideep Varma
Writer-director and founder of Impact Index
Playing in empty stadiums is not an attractive option, but it is certainly better than cancelling a tournament that the cricket industry in India relies on. TV rights and advertisements, which are the most significant part of the IPL, won’t be impacted even if there are no crowds.
People will definitely watch (given that many will be at home due to the coronavirus scare) and the IPL 2020 will get more traction on TV than its previous editions.
It’ll actually be interesting to see which teams deliver, in case the tournament is played in empty stadiums, which otherwise often host partisan crowds. It’ll be equally fascinating to watch cricketers, who play international cricket, (especially those from India, who hardly play domestic cricket) deliver without this energy-booster element in the game. They will all have to draw on from their experience of playing domestic cricket, where stands are almost empty. It won’t be easy, considering they’ve gotten hooked to the drug of crowd energy in international cricket. It’ll be a test of character for these cricketers.
This IPL will be unique, a once-in-a-lifetime experience. For those watching it on TV, it’ll provide a unique texture to their IPL memories that will separate this season from all others. That’s the positive way to look at this.
Kanthi D Suresh
Founder, Power Sportz
When the International Olympic Committee is thinking to postpone the Olympics because of the coronavirus threat, I don’t see any reason why there should be a hurry in holding the IPL in India. We don’t have clarity on how the virus is spreading and the way to stop it. So, the least we can do is to avoid risky situations. Sports is a public function, as declared by the honourable Supreme Court. So, when you’re indulging in a sporting activity, you are undertaking a public function, therefore responsibility should be much higher.
To say you’re ensuring hygiene and nothing will happen to spectators, is taking it a little too far. Having said that, BCCI as an entity is not bothered whether there is stadium attendance or not. Their broadcast deal is done and the revenue is guaranteed.
I think it will be a responsible step to postpone the IPL till we get more clarity on coronavirus and the ways to contain it.
Cricket is like a religion in India. To hold a cricket match in India with empty stands is like playing with the sentiments of the fans. Let’s not hurt their sentiments and put their health at risk.
Gulu Ezekiel 
Freelance sports journalist and author
Is sport more important than life-and-death? The answer should be a no-brainer really — nothing is. The IPL Governing Council will meet Saturday to take a call on the tournament’s prospects for this year. Should it go ahead or not? Can it be staged behind closed doors? What about the participation of international players now that the Indian government has suspended all visas with a few exceptions till 15 April?
The mega-sporting event is slated to kick off on 29 March. Social media is abuzz with fans pleading for the tournament to go ahead, sans spectators. We have been told livelihoods are at risk.
But such a measure won’t work. Italy tried the idea during the Serie A football league — today, the entire nation of 60 million people is in a lockdown and the league stands suspended. The National Basketball Association (NBA) tried it too in the US. Now, a player has tested positive and the league stands cancelled.
Holding an IPL tournament of this magnitude even without spectators puts at risk the lives of players, support staff and media, and increases the chances of the infection’s spread.
So, there is no choice really for the BCCI — suspend the IPL till further notice. Or else, the government must step in and do so. And this applies to all sporting and other mass events. The risks are just too high.
Also read: Scindia in BJP: Congress leaders can’t do without power or Gandhis failing to revive party?
By Unnati Sharma, journalist at ThePrint
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
