Amit Shah rushed to AIIMS, ‘felt uneasy’ 3 days after testing negative for Covid
New Delhi: Three days after Home Minister Amit Shah tested negative for Covid-19, he was rushed to All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in the national capital late Monday night.
According to a source, Shah was taken to AIIMS after he complained of “uneasiness” and “breathing difficulties”.
AIIMS confirmed that he has been admitted to the facility.
“Amit Shah has been complaining of fatigue and body aches for the last 3-4 days. He has tested negative for Covid 19. He has been admitted to AIIMS for post COVID care,” said the statement released by Dr Aarti Vij, chairperson (media and protocol division), AIIMS.
“He is comfortable and is continuing his work from the hospital,” the statement added.
According to the same source, his doctors did his initial check-up at his residence and then suggested that he be taken to the hospital.
“He felt uneasy. His vitals were checked and the doctors suggested that he be taken to the hospital. He is doing fine and in fact will be working from the hospital,” the source said.
Also read: 8 am to midnight, it’s ‘out-of-sight’ Amit Shah who’s quietly managing India’s Covid crisis
Shah had tested positive for Covid on 2 August and was admitted at Medanta Hospital in  Gurugram for 12 days.
The senior BJP leader, who also suffers from diabetes — a comorbidity — had initially shown mild symptoms, but he was fine after he was admitted at the hospital.
According to a second source, his condition had remained stable at Medanta and he was even handling some work from there.
Just before being admitted, he had attended a webinar to mark the 100th death anniversary of freedom fighter Bal Gangadhar Tilak and was also present at the cabinet meeting that approved the new National Education Policy (NEP).
However, he missed the bhoomi poojan event for the Ram temple at Ayodhya on 5 August.
He was discharged from the hospital on 14 August after he tested negative but was advised to quarantine himself at home for a few days.
“Today, my corona test report has come and it is negative. I thank God and also express my heartfelt gratitude to all those who wished for my recovery and gave strength to my family. I will be in home isolation for a few more days on the advice of doctors,” he had tweeted in Hindi.
Also read: BJP vs opposition is just like Coke vs Pepsi. Catch-up Hindutva won’t work
