83 quarantined in Army facility in Manesar after returning from coronavirus-hit Italy
New Delhi: Eighty-three people, including nine foreigners of Indian origin, who arrived here Wednesday from COVID-19 hit Italy on an Air India flight have been quarantined at the Army facility in Manesar near Delhi, officials said.
The Indian Army said 16 children (six female and 10 male) and one infant are among the 83 people.
“Seventy-four individuals are Indian nationals and remaining nine are foreigners of Indian origin (six Italians and three US nationals),” the officials said.
Italy is one of the nations severely affected by coronavirus, with several parts of the country under lockdown to prevent transmission.
The evacuees will be monitored for two weeks by a qualified team of doctors and staff members, to watch for any signs of infection.
“If any individual is suspected to be infected, he/she will be shifted to an isolation facility,” the officials added.
Daily medical examination of all 83 people will be done at the facility, they said.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
After 14 days, persons with no symptoms will be allowed to go home with their detailed documentation sent to the district, state surveillance units for further observation, the officials said.
Apart from playing games, watching TV and having meals together within a barrack, no one will be allowed to interact with the members of another barrack and definitely not of another sector, they said.
“Those found infected will be shifted to Safdarjung hospital isolation ward for further medical exams and recovery. Samples will be sent to Department of Virology AIIMS and confirmation will be done by the NCDC (National Centre for Disease Control),” they added.
The Army officials said 119 individuals who were on board Diamond Princess Cruise Ship off Japan Coast and brought back in an Air India’s special flight from Japan, and currently under quarantine facility at Manesar, completed their two weeks of quarantine on Wednesday.
“Once the final test results which are expected by tomorrow (March 12) arrive, they will be allowed to go home with their detailed documentation sent to the district/state surveillance units for further surveillance,” they added.
Indian students brought to India from China were also kept at the Army’s quarantine centre in Manesar.
The Union health ministry said on Wednesday the number of novel coronavirus patients in the country has risen to 60, with 10 more positive cases — eight from Kerala and one each from Delhi and Rajasthan — being reported since Tuesday’s update.
