Coronavirus porn is becoming famous and revealing human stupidity once again
Coronavirus porn is spreading as fast as the pandemic, as is quarantine porn and hazmat-suit porn. “MILF In Coronavirus Quarantine Gets Hard F****d for Medicine” is the title of a new video doing the rounds. And there are hundreds of such videos. Most roleplay as health workers and patients, others as dying couples. Depravity is what depravity does.
The problem isn’t with porn here, but the type of porn being created and why. Also, is making porn the best way to deal with coronavirus in deserted Wuhan? Is it the healthiest quarantine activity?
Unfortunately, this new genre of pornography has gone viral on Pornhub and XVideos, with more than 100,000 views on some clips. It looks like a section of the world has forgotten that we are in the middle of a pandemic that has already paralysed transport and communication in most parts of the world. As of 11 March 2020, the novel coronavirus or COVID-19 has killed over 4,300 and infected around 126,380 people.
 Also read: Better to be solo than sorry: Coronavirus is a perfect excuse for introverts
At the time of a global crisis, which has the potential to kill thousands more, why create and indulge in this bizarre form of entertainment and encourage others to follow suit? In an interview to the Vice, Spicy, the actor from the Spicy x Rice duo, said that coronavirus porn is their effort to raise awareness about the deadly disease. He also added that people being attracted to coronavirus porn is similar to people scared of their own shadow being inclined to watching horror films. 
This is the most ridiculous reasoning the adult film industry could come up with for the sake of business. Does it come with cautions and notices? Does a health warning play before you watch it, as it does if you try to call anyone in India? Even if the porn industry is trying to propagate some tiny bit of preventive information, sick and twisted story plots like ‘She has the coronavirus but he didn’t give a hoot’ is not the way to do it. Also, the comparison between watching porn videos and horror movies is just tragic. It only reflects the lack of common sense and social responsibility. 
Moreover, with high risks of COVID-19 contamination, is watching porn the only way to raise awareness when the World Health Organization, human health agencies and governments across the globe have constantly reminded us of ‘social distancing’ and switching to ‘namaste’. If this isn’t the ultimate mockery of the ailment then what is? 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: India can fight COVID-19, but only if the private sector is allowed to step in quickly
Coronavirus porn is not the first of its kind. Porn sites also offer other genres for sadistic voyeurism including ebola, cancer, sexually transmitted disease porn and beastiality. Not to forget that rape porn and other sexual torture videos already have a huge audience. 
