Mizoram, Manipur are using this traditional practice to keep coronavirus in check
New Delhi: With Covid-19 infections showing no signs of abating, the traditional practice of having shops without keepers is helping people in Mizoram and Manipur maintain social distancing while also aiding farmers in running their businesses.
Known as nghah lou dawr in Mizoram, the tradition is such that shops are unmanned and buyers deposit their money in jars at the stalls. Working solely on the principle of trust, these shops are also found in the hill district of Ukhrul in Manipur.
The owner of a shop in Ukhrul was quoted as saying, “I maintain records of all that I keep at my shop. Sometimes, I find the amount dropped in the box is more than the prices of vegetables taken away by travellers. People give some extra money out of love”.
Many of these shops are found beside highways, selling fresh green vegetables, along with small boxes tied to bamboo poles for placing money.
Mizoram Chief Minister Zoramthanga recently took to Twitter to laud the concept.
The year is 2020; #Honesty #Hospitality #Trust comes handy again for #Mizoram during these trying times of #COVID19 outbreak.Traditional Nghah-loh-dawr,(shops without shopkeepers) comes handy for many sellers & buyers in maintaining safe social distancing.#MizoramFightsCovid19 pic.twitter.com/Y1BGiZVLVR
— Zoramthanga (@ZoramthangaCM) June 18, 2020

Also read: Mizoram minister Robert Romawia Royte carries boulders to help rebuild neighbour’s house
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Santa Khurai, a transgender activist from Manipur, has started an online campaign to raise Rs 2.25 lakh to buy smartphones and tablets for poor students who are missing out on online lessons during the lockdown.
Khurai, who is from Imphal East, told The News Mill that there are around 200 families in her neighbourhood of Khurai Sajor Leikai.
“Some fortunate families have multiple smartphones, and can access these daily assignments. However, there are a few families…(that) often have just one basic keypad phone for everyone in the family, just for basic communication. Many of them lost their jobs because of the lockdown, and in the meantime their children’s learning has stopped since they cannot access assignments on WhatsApp,” she said.
She also plans to buy tablets for 15 kids with the fund. So far, Khurai has been able to raise Rs 1.5 lakh from 44 supporters.
Also read: Nagaland village hosts open beauty salon to help locals earn money in lockdown
A Covid-19 medical team at the district hospital in Mizoram’s remote Lawngtlai area has found a unique way to keep its Covid-19 patients happy.
To create a fun-filled atmosphere, the healthcare workers have asked patients to engage in short musical performances and videos which are later shared among the doctors, nurses and other patients.
Dr Elsadai Lalbersiama, who heads the Covid-19 medical team at the Lawngtlai district hospital, reportedly said that the challenge has shown them a way to connect with the patients and boost their physical as well as mental health during the crisis.
The Lawngtlai district, which is located along the India-Myanmar border, has eight Covid-19 patients, and all of them are undergoing treatment at the district hospital.
Also read: Unexplained tremors every 15 mins force over 1,000 near Assam’s Baghjan to leave their homes
To help children, who are in conflict with the law, get adequate care and protection, a ‘child-friendly corner’ has been set-up at the Aalo police station in Arunachal Pradesh’s West Siang district.
Refurbished by the women and child development department, in collaboration with the police, the room has been set up to give children an environment where they feel protected.
