India concerned by coronavirus situation in Italy — Full text of Jaishankar’s speech in Rajya Sabha
New Delhi: External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar Wednesday addressed Rajya Sabha on the current situation on coronavirus and said the government is fully committed to the safety of Indians across the world.
The statement comes on a day the number of those infected by COVID-19 in India rose to 60. According to Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, new cases have been reported from Kerala, Rajasthan and Delhi.
Jaishankar informed the House that over 6,000 Indian nationals are stranded across different provinces of Iran, which includes about 1,100 pilgrims from the union territories of Ladakh, Jammu & Kashmir and Maharashtra.
The government brought back 58 Indians on a military from Tehran Monday night, hours after Jaishankar met families of students from Jammu & Kashmir who were stranded in Iran.
This is the second such evacuation being carried out by the Indian Air Force since the coronavirus outbreak in China last December. On 20 February, a C-17 aircraft was sent to China with medical supplies, which brought back 76 Indians and seven foreign nationals.
Also read: Better to be solo than sorry: Coronavirus is a perfect excuse for introverts
Hon’ble Chairman Sir,
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
I rise to apprise this august House of some recent developments pertaining to Indians stranded in Iran as a result of the coronavirus situation. The House is already aware of the efforts Government had made to bring back Indians from Wuhan in China by mounting three flights to that city. Thereafter, we brought back the crew and passengers of a cruise ship off Japan that was affected by coronavirus. These evacuations also included some foreign nationals. Our focus since has shifted to Iran, in view of the sharp increase of coronavirus in that country.
As per available information, there are over 6,000 Indian nationals in various provinces of Iran. These include about 1,100 pilgrims mainly from the Union Territories of Ladakh and Jammu and Kashmir and the State of Maharashtra; nearly 300 students primarily from the UT of Jammu and Kashmir; about 1,000 fishermen, including from Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat; and others who are on longer term stay in Iran for pursuing their livelihood and religious studies.
As Government started receiving information about the spike in coronavirus cases in Iran, as a precautionary measure, direct flights between India and Iran were temporarily suspended with effect from 27 February. Advisories were issued to avoid travel and returning passengers were started to be screened. This is an ongoing exercise.
Also read: How self-quarantine can ‘flatten the epidemic curve’ as coronavirus cases rise
Our Embassy in Tehran and Consulates in Bandar Abbas and Zahidan naturally reached out immediately to Indian nationals in Iran to ascertain their welfare. An advisory was issued asking our nationals to observe appropriate precautions. Emergency contact details of the Indian Mission were put out. Embassy and Consulate officials have been reassuring the Indian nationals and ensuring that they are in good health and had adequate provisions. I mention this as an overall approach but also with specific reference to the fishermen community whose welfare has been raised with me by a number of Hon’ble Members.
Given the large number of Indians in Iran, it was natural that we should seek to sequence their return, taking into account their location and exposure. The initial focus is on visiting pilgrims. Many of them are in Qom, where coronavirus incidence has been strong. The nature of their residency also increases the risks of exposure. Age is also a factor that was taken into account. As their welfare is being currently addressed, we are now focusing on Indian students. Many of them are studying medicine and are fully aware of the precautions to be taken in this difficult situation. The Embassy is in regular contact with them as a group. Our understanding is that the region where most fishermen are located has not been affected so severely. These factors will guide our approach in the coming days.
Over the last few days, Government has been making focused efforts for the safe return of the stranded Indians. Given the scale of COVID -19 infection and its pressure on Iran’s own resources, a team of six Indian health officials has been deputed to Iran in order to set up testing and sampling facilities there. The first batch of 108 samples were received in India on 7 March. These were tested and 58 Indian pilgrims (25 men, 31 women and 2 children), who tested negative, were repatriated in special IAF C-17 flight on 10 March. We have also received samples of 529 more Indians on this flight which are being tested in National Institute of Virology, Pune. We continue to collect more samples in Tehran and our endeavor is to ensure the earliest possible return of our nationals after appropriate testing and screening. We are working with the Iranian authorities to operate some limited commercial flights for facilitating early return of the remaining Indians after testing them.
Our Embassy staff and the medical team are working round-the-clock under difficult conditions to ensure the objective of earliest possible return. The House will appreciate their operational constraints, given that there are restrictions that have been instituted for public health reasons in Iran. It is not easy to organise transport, accommodation and other logistics. The Iranian system is naturally stretched and we appreciate their cooperation in these circumstances.

During my recent visit to Srinagar, I took the initiative to meet parents of some of the students who are in Iran. Their anxiety at this time is completely understandable. I shared with them in detail the ground situation and sought their understanding. I assured them that Government would facilitate the earliest possible return of their children.
Our Consulate in Bandar Abbas are in touch with the Indian fishermen, who are in southern provinces of Iran, including in cities of Asaalouyeh, Chiruyeh and Kish. Some of them have been visited and others would be soon. Provision of essential supplies to them is being ensured. As per available information, they are all in good health.
I would like to strongly emphasize that Government remains fully committed towards the safety and welfare of our nationals in any part of the world. This has been the hallmark of our foreign policy.
The House will surely appreciate the few other Nations have done what we have with respect to the COVID -19. The global coronavirus situation is being monitored on a continuous basis by a Group of Secretaries headed by Cabinet Secretary and a Group of Ministers, chaired by Minister of Health and Family Welfare. My Ministerial colleague has already apprised the House of measures being taken to control and contain the spread of virus in the country. Prime Minister himself has reviewed the situation from time to time. We have been regularly issuing travel advisories and visa guidelines that reflect the situation in countries of concern. E-visas and visa on arrival have been temporarily suspended in certain cases. Precautionary measures are also being taken on all our land borders as well as air and sea entry points.
The situation in Italy is now emerging as a cause of great concern. I would like to share with the Hon’ble Members that steps in this regard have already been initiated. The challenge is growing by the day in Europe and we will respond accordingly.
I am confident that Hon’ble Members of this House would join me in commending the efforts of our medical team, the officials of the Indian Embassy and Consulate, the Indian Air Force crew and all those in India who are working tirelessly and selflessly, to ensure that our people in Iran are safe, and can return expeditiously. The coronavirus challenge will require a focused and sustained effort on our part and we will keep the House apprised of developments.
