Punjab govt orders detailed audit of Covid-19 deaths to understand high mortality rate
Chandigarh: The Punjab government has ordered a detailed audit of every coronavirus death, Chief Minister Amarinder Singh told Congress president Sonia Gandhi on Thursday.
He said the detailed audit has been ordered to understand and check the high mortality rate in the state.
The government is also strengthening its pandemic containment measures under the guidance of an expert panel, he told the Congress president in a video conference.
The state has so far reported 16 deaths.
According to a statement, the chief minister said the mortality rate in the state was largely high due to co-morbidity (additional medical conditions) and a lack of health-seeking behavior (patients come late to a hospital).
The chief minister, however, said Punjab had to be compared with Kerala and Gujarat, which were states with high NRI population.
Punjab is doing significantly better than Gujarat, he said, adding that in terms of cases per 10 lakh population, the numbers were even lower than Kerala (nine/million in Punjab against 12/million in Kerala), he said.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Punjab currently has 257 positive cases, including 16 deaths and two critical patients, while 53 have been cured, said the CM.
Also read: Most Muslims in Punjab’s Malerkotla have Tablighi link. But that’s not their big Covid worry
 
Singh informed the party leadership that the state government was being guided by a group of experts, including former PGIMER Director K K Talwar, in handling the COVID-19 crisis.
In percentage terms, cases in Punjab have steadily declined from 2.57 per cent of the total cases in India (as of March 31) to 1.22 per cent in three weeks (till April 22), claimed the CM.
The CM also cited an example of SBS Nagar, which was formerly known as Nawanshahar, as a case of effective containment that has been “appreciated” by the Centre as well as the media.
In SBS Nagar, which was one of the first hotspots in the country, all 18 patients have recovered and discharged, he claimed, adding that no case has been reported in the district since March 26.
SBS Nagar had reported one fatality last month when a Germany-returned 70-year-old man died.
The chif minister said the state has three containment zones–Jawharapur in Mohali, Safabadi Gate in Patiala, and Budhlada– from where over 15 deaths have been reported.
Three districts of Ferozepur, Fazilka, Bathinda are green zones with no coronavirus case.
With respect to testing, the CM said 7,887 tests have been done so far.
At present, the testing rate in the state, at 248/million is slightly lower than the national average of 309/million (excluding rapid testing).
Regarding the rapid testing, the chief minister said 3,502 cases were tested before the Indian Council of Medical Research suspended such tests.
The state currently has 10,500 rapid testing kits supplied by the ICMR while 10,000 have been ordered by the state government, with deliveries in progress.
The government has also floated a tender for another 50,000 kits, he said.
