Modi govt advises homoeopathy, Unani to prevent coronavirus that has no known cure yet
Bengaluru: The Ministry of AYUSH Wednesday issued an advisory for the “prevention” of infection from the novel strain of coronavirus using homoeopathy, and “symptomatic management” using Unani medicines.
In its advisory, which met with instant criticism on social media, the ministry recommended a course of Arsenicum album30, used in homeopathy to treat influenza-like illness. The prescription came after the 64th meeting of the Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy Tuesday.
The advisory also recommended Unani preventive treatments such as drinking shadang paniya, consuming samshamani, agastya harityaki, and other Unani drugs.
It also gives a dietary recommendation of “easily digestible, light and soft diets”, apart from personal hygiene tips that are generally issued by health experts across the board to prevent air-borne infection.
The novel coronavirus strain has no known cure or preventive vaccine yet, according to health experts around the world. Further, there is no evidence that the prescribed diet or medicines work.
The strain was discovered just over a month ago and was confirmed earlier in January. It has so far killed over a hundred people and spread to 15 countries. The virus can spread through air even before its common cold-like symptoms can manifest in an individual, and can escalate to fatality in some cases.
The Ministry of AYUSH — which stands for Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa Rigpa and Homoeopathy — has come under repeated criticism for propounding pseudoscientific medicine as alternative medicine.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: China is perfectly prepared to fight coronavirus
Arsenicum album is a highly diluted solution of arsenic trioxide which effectively contains little to no arsenic after dilution. It is used by practising homoeopaths to treat various symptoms — not diseases — such as digestive disorders and common cold, as well as arsenic poisoning.
As a homoeopathic prescription, it is considered generally safe since the resultant contains almost no arsenic at all, but “improperly used” homoeopathic preparations in treatment have resulted in cases of arsenic poisoning in India.
Arsenic is highly toxic to humans and in controlled doses is used intravenously to treat cancer of the white blood cells. Mild arsenic poisoning through ingestion has symptoms identical to coronavirus — diarrhoea, vomiting, fever, runny nose and headaches. Arsenicum album treatments, like other homoeopathic treatments, are not considered scientifically and medically sound or effective.
Homoeopathy as a system was created by the German physician Samuel Hahnemann in 1796 under the premise that similar symptoms (not diseases) can be cured with similar remedies. It involves repeatedly diluting a substance with water and sugar until not even a single molecule of the original substance is present in the final solution.
Due to the dangers posed by not obtaining the desired treatment for an affliction, homoeopathy is declared a pseudoscience and isn’t allowed any form of government funding in multiple countries such as Australia, Switzerland, England, and France. It is banned in Spain. The European Academies’ Science Advisory Council, and the Commission on Pseudoscience and Research Fraud of Russian Academy of Sciences have both concluded that it is ineffective and poses significant harm.
Also read: Coronavirus poses new threat to global economy which was just beginning to stabilise
Unani is an Arabic system of medicine, originating in ancient Greece, based on the Greek system of four fluids or humours in the body — phlegm, blood, yellow bile and black bile. It has heavy Indian and Chinese influences in its practice.
The system believes that each person’s body is composed of a unique combination of these four humours and treatments for diagnosis follow the patterns of Izalae Sabab (elimination of cause), Tadeele Akhlat (normalisation of humours) and Tadeele Aza (normalisation of tissues/organs).
There are several Indian universities devoted to Unani medicine, which provide graduation as well as postgraduation degrees.
However, practitioners of Unani are not authorised to practise medicine in India unless they are also trained as qualified physicians. Practising Unani medicine and similar forms of rural alternative medicine in India was banned under the Travancore-Cochin Medical Practitioners’ Act of 1953.
The Supreme Court as well as the Indian Medical Association have declared Unani to be ‘quackery’.
In 2018, the Supreme Court said “unqualified, untrained quacks are posing a great risk to the entire society and playing with the lives of people without having the requisite training and education in the science from approved institutions”.
Many Unani treatments are also considered to be poisonous and are not recommended by the World Health Organization.
On Wednesday, several social media users criticised the government move to propagate “unscientific” homoeopathy and Unani medicines.
the government of India (as usual) is peddling unscientific crap
ayurveda, homeopathy and unani are NOT legitimate branches of medicine and have no material proof in curing or preventing such diseases
please don't swallow placebo-inducing sugar pills thinking you'll be safe. https://t.co/u9vV2n8itD
— v̴̢͉̙͙̜̘̣̓͑̽̾̓͘͝ͅo̸̯̮͂̽̉̓̃͝͠͝i̸͎͍͕̭̩̊͆̇̃̅̽̄d̷̿̈́̀̄͑ (@bismillahcamus) January 29, 2020

#Coronavirus breaks out, China embarks on building a 1000 bed hospital in 6 daysIndia: ye lo homeopathy, 4 goli subah 4 raat ko khaali pet. No onion no garlic. OK?
— Raghav Chopra (@RaghavChopra_) January 29, 2020

Indian government putting people at risk by recommending the use of homeopathy. Wow. Just wow. https://t.co/ZJW3lGcc5g
— Tania Singh (@TwinklingTania) January 29, 2020

Some users also mocked the advisory in light of reports that China is building hospitals in Wuhan, where the coronavirus cases originated, in a matter of a few days to provide extra beds to control the situation.
China is building 1500 bed hospital in 9 days to control #coronavirus.Indian Government is advising homeopathy & Unani which are pure quackery.
International media, @WHO @UN please take note. https://t.co/XtlRdgXJI4
— Aparna (@chhuti_is) January 29, 2020

 
Also read: Coronavirus spread pushes drugmakers to hunt for ways to stop pathogen eluding travel curbs
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
dead animal putrid matter infested air,arsenic alb  is beneficial as per salzer quoted by nc das in gleanings article.nc das gleanings notes are very  beneficial for self help in homeopathy,like senecio for obstructed menstruation  oleander for undigested food diarrhoea ceonanthus q for jaundice etc..in fact olden days homeopathy was practiced by look at simple body symptoms and all top homeo doctors used to have discussion at one table now replaced by i am best attitude public gets confused who is best.so arsenic  recommended by ayush is beneficial to remove any poisioning effect on intestines.main path for food assimilation.
Henny  Heudens Mast author homeopathy miasm,clearly states that unless heriditary blockage ancestral carry over some disease prone manifestations are cleared normal prescribing of homeopathic medicines doe not help rather  acts as suppressor like allopathy or any other system.She has well examplified a case read simllimum 2006 vol xix where psora was blockage,other miasms sycosis syphilitic tubercular are more serious.those who can afford should treat their children at early stage from a reputed classical homeopath but limitation is they are few,most homeopaths treat like reckeweg mixtures imparting relief as on required basis but disease roots say embedded in personality trait of ancestors is not eliminated.
homeopathy random notes 1930 lesser writings by cm boger,disordered life forces soon exterriorise as disease picture if suppressed turn to  metastasis in more vital organs.he has also put on record injecting  heterogeneous matter into the blood stream violates law of nature full of danger.dorothy shepherd trated many  retarded children due to vaccination side effects by thuja homeo remedy.ha roberts put on record wrongly treated arthritis metastases in heart life miserable.there is latest very fine article building resilience in critical time by elizabeth adalian well known homeopath.even water kept overnight in copper vessel at times cleans blood neem capsule cleans blood but do not take in routine as indians are taking aloevera guduchi etc without advice of trained vaidya.best is go to AYUSH homeopathy wing for constitutional treatment if you feel subacute symptoms like vague pains chronic fatigue etc.avoid homeopaths who do not have confidence to write name of  remedy in prescription.stitch in time saves nine.
homeopathic case management covid 19 best guidance is available in 176 page webinar 04 april 2020 by andre saine nd arranged by american institute of homeopathy at site homeopathyusa dot org. .bryonia for chest pain highly recommended.ant arsenic for dry cough and difficult breathing.camphora 1m for diarrhoea senior citizens conium eupato perf recommended.o2 osi index less than 94 percent one must go to reputed hospital.this webinar is so elaborate in giving clinical guidance that even experienced homeopaths will love to keep a copy for routine practice in other diseases.
swami pradiptananda remarks rhus tox very valid i use it clears body toxins,five phos 6x german be taken in routine.in fact 1993-94 i with  col bose charity family attached to  Ramakarishna mission used to go to nihati well known homeopath dr ak bhattacharya he gave us his latest book practical homeopathy a masterpiece in homeopathy even layman can understand..
Homeopathy herald 1942 sep vol5 no 7, NC Bose   editorial  remarks a cry to west bengal govt at that time are so touching as he could anticipate future  todays condition.see example cornea inflammation red eye is red humid as moon increases but pale and dry as moon decreases remedy is clematis.there is no short cut to homeopathy by way of clinical tests,olden time homeopaths could sense rays of even planets and link with homeo remedy.atleast  some high up in west bengal order study group homeo teachings of nc bose and dc das gupta some hidden suggestions may come up to deal with present crisis.
few days back media articles by dr das and sh biswas bbc correspondent throw much light on medicine aid available in india esp rural areas.for cough cold i use hamdard joshina very effective.homeopathy i have educational interest it is holy science but symptom oriented,example mag carb used to strengthen mind thinking of orphaned children in high potency and medium potency for poor digestion milk.many use homeopathy low potency mixtures it is as good as allopathy..system cannot be changed overnight but atleast efforts be made rural innocent be convinced only to govt dispensary allopathic or homeopathic ayurvedic.hamdard unani medicines are safest no side effects. viewed by own use.
I personally use homoeopathic medicine Rhus Tox 200 as antidote for Coronavirus and till now safe. In future what will happen I don’t know. Though before I successfully used Rhus Tox as antidote for measles, chicken pox,  influenga and conjitivitis
like diseases caused by viruses in my friend circle if requested. I’m 75 years old. I studied many homoeopathic books treat my many diseases with homoeopathic medicines.
Please don’t mislead people that you are giving them measles and chicken pox prevention with your quack nosodes. That puts their lives in danger because they don’t get any real immunity. So far they have only been protected by herd immunity from real vaccines and are a growing threat to the society as their numbers grow. Anti-vaxxers such as yourself are a danger to society.
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/11012900/Why-do-we-believe-in-homeopathy-Ten-tricks-the-brain-plays-on-us.html
This is Homeopathy reality – sorry replied to wrong post earlier.
1. ‘The principles of homeopathy contradict known chemical, physical and biological laws and persuasive scientific trials proving its effectiveness are not available.’
Russian Academy of Sciences
2. ‘Homeopathy should not be used to treat health conditions that are chronic, serious, or could become serious. People who choose homeopathy may put their health at risk if they reject or delay treatments for which there is good evidence for safety and effectiveness.’
National Health and Medical Research Council, Australia
3. ‘These products are not supported by scientific evidence.’
Health Canada
4 “Homeopathic remedies don’t meet the criteria of evidence based medicine.”
Hungarian Academy of Sciences
5. ‘The incorporation of anthroposophical and homeopathic products in the Swedish directive on medicinal products would run counter to several of the fundamental principles regarding medicinal products and evidence-based medicine.’
Swedish Academy of Sciences
6. ‘We recommend parents and caregivers not give homeopathic teething tablets and gels to children and seek advice from their healthcare professional for safe alternatives.’
US Food and Drug Administration
7. ‘There is little evidence to support homeopathy as an effective treatment for any specific condition.’
National Centre for Complementary and Integrative Health, US
8. ‘There is no good-quality evidence that homeopathy is effective as a treatment for any health condition.’
National Health Service, UK
9. ‘Homeopathic remedies perform no better than placebos, and the principles on which homeopathy is based are scientifically implausible.’
House of Commons Science and Technology Committee, UK
10. ‘Homeopathy has not definitively proven its efficacy in any specific indication or clinical situation.’
Ministry of Health, Spain
11. ‘There is a constant increase in the quantity of evidence and the conviction of the scientific community in medicine, that homeopathy should be treated as one of the unscientific methods of so-called “alternative medicine”, which proposes worthless products without scientifically proven efficacy.’
National Medical Council, Poland
12. ‘From a purely clinical perspective, the fact remains that there is no valid empirical proof  of the efficacy of homeopathy (evidence-based medicine) beyond the placebo effect.’
Federaal Kenniscentrum voor de Gezondheidszorg, Belgium
If homeopathy pseudoscience why government open so many colleges in India and all over the world why not shut down colleges and universities and why renuined the future of homeopathic student why
We have a government that thinks cow urine cures cancer and tulsi can protect you against corona. Don’t expect intelligence from government when people act with religious fundamentalism in mind.
They will only support quack medicine.
As i listen that the corona viruses completely finished inside the stomach because of bile juice
,I don’t know that is it right or wrong if it is right then please tell me
Because if it is true then if we try to make the bile juice  then i think that we can improve our situation
Coronaviruses don’t infect you by going to your stomach, they infect you by going to your lungs.
Bile is irrelevant.
Dr.TAJ.Bsc Psy.BEMS.DHMSc.DHSM.
Siddha,Ayurvedha , unani ,homeopathy ,Naturopathy electropathy are all basicaly in natural raw materials. So we can use anti viral herbal extract tications in corona viral infection.
Hello,
There are certain inaccuracies in the article. 
I am referring specifically to the statement “However, practitioners of Unani are not authorised to practise medicine in India unless they are also trained as qualified physicians. Practising Unani medicine and similar forms of rural alternative medicine in India was banned under the Travancore-Cochin Medical Practitioners’ Act of 1953. The Supreme Court as well as the Indian Medical Association have declared Unani to be ‘quackery’.”
Unfortunately, the statement is incorrect in whole. 
The first sentence of the statement is not very clear. But if it is meant that unani practitioners must have some additional qualification (including a qualification in “modern medicine”) than the diploma/certificate in unani tibba medicine, the statement is incorrect.
Further, the Act referred to not only does not bar the practice of unani medicine but explicitly recognises and authorises the practice of unani and other forms of “indigenous medicine” and also homeopathy, subject to registration under the Act. 
And further, the Supreme Court has not declared unani to be quackery. In the judgment cited, the Supreme Court has merely called  unqualified/untrained practitioners to be quacks. That is not the same as calling the unani form of medicine itself to be quackery!
I hope ThePrint will immediately publish a correction to the article.
HOMOEOPATHY is a NANO science..
 Future is moving towards NANO technology
Samuel Hahnemann was not a fool.
Everything he said about Homeopathy was proven wrong already.
Only illiterates and incompetents who can’t do anything better become homeopaths or ayurvedics and call themselves Doctors. It is like a bus driver who boasts that he drives a vehicle worth millions, – factually correct but pathetic and absolutely incorrect in spirit of what is meant.
Have you understood the science and logic behind homeopathy. If you have and still call him ‘not a fool’, then obviously there are two instead of one. Well three actually, the biggest one is squatting on the PM’s chair and defecating on the nation.
There is no science behind homeopathy. All scientists agree on that.
There is some childish “logic” behind its doctrines (fake laws) which was proven false.
Sorry, meant to reply to parent.
THe ALpHa, you are one of the very few educated people here.
Modi govt advises homoeopathy
its not modi government its
Government of India
modi is just a party leader of BJP
change your title how to dare you to write these lines
The Indian government is not doing anything . However, there is a big issue of corono virus . It will be soon spread in the air too . We have to be carefull. Be healthy
Exactly 100 years (1920) ago thousands of people were saved by homoeo medicines across west from America to England and Europe from the outbreak of the killer virus which caused Spanish Flu and killed people in lakhs.                            You can check / cross check these facts in the volumes of history of medicine laid to rest in libraries of the medical schools.                                      Not only Spanish Flu , pandemics of influenza , diphtheria , cholera , plague , dengue etc were treated effectively with utmost success by homoeo physicians in the western world.                  Among the patients those who visited homoeo doctors and took medicines given by them were all saved and those who were attended by the so called mainstream Allopathic doctors and hospitals died in massive numbers.                               hence it is high time we realise the fallacy of the ‘English’ medicine and the truth content of Homoeopathic system of medicine and save the prospective victims of Corona / wuhan virus.            PS : off late (in the past 10-12 years) patients suffering from the viral infections – Swine Flu , Dengue and Chikun Gunya were brought back to life by homoeo medicines with great ease and elan. Wish all the anti homoeo ‘rationalists’ , pseudo intellectuals , rabble rousers and pied pipers of the pharma industry and market keep their mouths shut.
That one has to go back 100 + years to find a so-called,”success story” is in itself a telling comment on the discipline. And by the way it was 1918, not 1920. The pandemic stopped by 1920.
Finally, homoeopathy is actually German in origin,  so the standard, “East vs West” argument won’t fly.
Fellow Indian youths, please comment in a more sensible and educated manner. If you do not know something, please do not criticize it without attempting to know it first. In fact, every individual ought to learn the Unani, Ayurveda, homeopathy and naturopathy way of life and understand their own bodies and the prominent elements in their bodies. Then, their would not be any need of Allopathy and medical insurances required! 
By the way, it would be advisable to continue taking to herbs and natural ways of boosting the bodies immunity. I will start Arsenic Album for my family as precaution.
Fellow Indian youths, when you don’t know something, look up the science.
Science says Homeopathy is a fake science. All scientists agree on that.
Don’t let quacks lie to you and give you Arsenic. Challenge them with science facts.
Learn science, biology, chemistry etc and read these quack books on homeopathy and no-science medicine. You will die laughing when you realize how stupid they all are. Then you will understand how unintelligent this government is.
If some one think allopathy is the only option for any disease then he is living with a myth..  Allopathy treats symptoms and not the disease specially chronic illnesses..
the only cure for chronic disorders is Ayurveda.
For Acute issues and immediate relief , definitely allopathy is the choice of treatment anytime and anywhere…
Coming to the corona virus, no one knows what may work effectively against this lethal virus.. it may be garlic or it may be a good decoction of polyherbal formulation.. or homeopathy. Nothing wrong in trying after all its all scientific.. and who so ever says it’s not scientific kindly explain me how do you define some thing scientific.
If allopathy can’t give a solution in this condition… Why denying in other pathy’s treatment…. Let them stay or die with Corona virus if they can’t believed in these treatments.. But please don’t criticise in this crucial situation… If any of their near n dear ones suffer they will run after homoeopathic remedies..n others… Shame on u guys
Those who are telling that homeopathy is a pseudoscience and telling that homeopathy medicines are placebos, can you dare to take these medicines for one month daily …
Yes really…Modi govt is trying what ever they can to reduce the Indias reputation…With Babas,Cows now with homeopathy…
With this attitude India never going to be a super power..
The nature itself has provided many  medicinal  plants, chemicals  to control diseases .Ayurveda had proved the same  since ancestral days. Cow extracts are also one of the  medicinal values. The person who uses the same can realise the value.  Homeopathic medicine is also prepared  from extracts  of medicinal plants .Allopathy  is also prepared  from plants extracts. But the preparation of medicine is different  in all the above systems.
Yeah those who are commenting that there is no evidence these homeopathy  medicines wont work…its right into there face when I say they dont have any evidence that they work…
Its really embarrsing when so many yound Indians still believe in babas,magic amd homeopathy while other countries are laughing at us…
Modern medicine never shamelessly claimed that they cure even before testing them….
Who says Homoeopathy is a pseudo science?? If u think it doesnt act then y do u say that it can harm you?? Arent you making illogical sentence?? In nature where there is action there is reaction.. If Homoeopathic medicines can harm you then it can cure u too. I have seen many patients getting cured by homoeopathy  in the stage of disease where allopathy said its a no hope case. Many surgical cases have been solve using Homoeopathic medicines. Homoeopathic tablets and globules contains medicines in dilute form its not  a placebo..
Let Modi and Shah get operable cancer stomach…. Let’s try AYUSH then….. 😂😂
Govt should give advisory to boycott Print, Scroll, Wire etc all bull craps
Every method,be it Allopathy ,Homeopathy,Ayurveda,unnani.All medicine r a creation of nature.Now we have to learn to respect n use them like gentlemen ,rather than pinpointing at each other.These r our hope an hope we all understand what nature has in abundance for human mankind in good n bad times.
Homeopathy can cure viral infections depending on symptoms we select drug & potency & repetition of drug if patient is critically ill needs IV fluids oxygen& nursing care
Patient should take Homeopathic prescription from Homeopathic Doctor only not by self Prescription from Homeopathic pharmacy , otherwise it’s intoxication ,not only Homeopathy prescription, whatever pathy it’s patients Right
NACHHATER Singh badhni kalan
Babas, sadhus , mantras, totkas donot prevent infection. 
why was India’s IMR so high in last century when antibiotics started preventing mortality and morbidity. 
Its plain simple witchcraft
Its witchcraft.
If mantra, and totkas could prevent deaths and infections why was India’s IMR so high in last century
As a doctor practicing medicine from nearly 15 years, I can say that the journalist doesn’t know basics of it. Symptomatic treatment aims at reliving symptoms. It doesn’t aim at removing the cause.
It many cases such as poisoning, if an exact antidote isn’t available, medical science advises symptomatic treatment.
Unless exact cure is available, symptomatic treatment is there best possible thing one can do.
The advisory of AYUSH no where claims that given recommendations are got talent of Corona virus. The recommendations clearly are to treat the symptoms.
Making an issue out of it is playing with lives of people, as people wouldn’t do even this much which will further endanger them. I wish journalistic standards weren’t so low in India.
(*Typos corrected)
Homoeopathy can definitely be tried.those talking against are foolish and  without having knowledge of the science behind homoeopathy.  Try it prophylatic as well as symptomatically. It is successful in controlling epidemies.
Dam sure we can say homeopathy is free from side effects n it cures not only disease but also brings diseased person to normal healthy living.
Check out the records we have given preventive to swine flu also.
Who are opposing this ans to yourself first ,whether allopathic treatment never did hazards to lives?
We are treating so many cases spoiled by allopaths.
Suppose u get cancer breast….. You’d still give your Ayush treatment eh….lol
As Far As Immediate Cure is Concerned Then Homoeopathy And Unani  Should Not Be Applied on Suffering Patients Because it Takes Time Which May Be Fatal for Infected Patients….So Currently The Wise Decision May Be The Application of Alleopathic Medicines So That No Immediate Loss of Lives Happens Because Historically Alleopathic Medicines are Considered Best For Immediate Life Saving Medical Methods….Also Chinese Too Can Apply Their Ancient Wisdom To Overcome Such Infections….Hope Infected Patients Get Proper Attention and Remain Safe.
Homeopathy treatment does not take time , homeopathy heals the mental state of the patient thereby improving his vital force which infact strengthens the body
And we call allopathy scientific, based on the lab results which turn otherwise when some other experiment calls out different results.
Every observation is based on observers capability, instrumentation and methods used.  Even in morden science no law is perpetual, a new finding could challenge the well established law. In that way every thing is puesdo, isn’t it?
To comment that something is wrong, one has to do research and publish in qualified journals. Else, its just another criticism from a fanatic! So, those who comment without proving that these medications do not work — which is not possible to prove, if one knows how these methodologies are used, is waste of time. You can never prove a medicine does not work, even many allopathic medicines do not work for many patients with same ailments. Just that someone came up with some statistics on a sample and it crosses a percentage which they define. Never criticise something  without really trying! Be a gentleman
I dont know about how others are taking this advisory but one thing for sure that somethong that we dont undwrstand does not mean it does not work. Outside world never considered homoeopathic as medicine but millions of people are getting cured every year using this medicine. If it does not cure you it wont harm you either than why not gove it a try.
Those claiming homeopathic bs is scientific. Send links for scientific papers proving that it works.
Hey there brother, homeopathy is a completely different branch of medince . It’s not pseudoscience , many cases havy been solved which involved changes at the cell level to treat the patient . Also as the methodology is different , the evaluation scheme should be different also . If you want to see cases , you can check out HHF mumbai .
Dear fellow human beings, please hear, there is no vaccine and sure treatment for corona virus, deaths are upcoming, why don’t you allow the alternative therapies for the patients, please as we called to be human beings allow them.
Dear so-called civilized person, please hear, there are so many examples in the history that after condemned many truths and facts by pitiful ignorence and innocent minds , which latter proved to be great valuable in NATURE,as in the greate person GALILEO.HOMEOPATHY IS GOD GIFTED ONE.How pity, that is, one side it is commenting as homeopathy is a placebo therapy and on the other side its using gives harmful affects.Please before we get the proper knowledge and wisdom about homeopathy asYOU named as to be SCIENTIFIC,, till then we should have accept it’s good results in the NATURE.Dont try to ruin it.Thank you.
I am one of the true example for homeo. For the past twenty five years I am taking only homeo for all types of problems,let it be cold, fever, stress ,migrain, stomache problem ,uterus problem , common headache ,typhoid etc etc.First there is no side effects.People.should not talk  wrong about anything without knowing about it.For fever either me or my kids never taken not  even a single paracetamol
I dare u to go to Wuhan and be on homeo then ….then I’ll believe u
Medicine Pyrogenium cured me & saved my life from getting further septic fevers owing to surgical procedure. If you don’t believe homeopathy because you never got cured by it anytime in your life. But those who got cured can easily take homeopathy because they know how much helpful homeopathy can be to cure incurable diseases that allopathy could not do.
I have tested on myself that homeopathy acts brilliantly if right medicine in right dose can be administered to the patient. For curing Coronavirus one can also select homeopathy medicine Pyrogenium 200, if Arsenic fails. I used to have septic fevers every alternate weeks after surgery and not taking antibiotics was not giving me a permanent solution since the fever attack resumed once antibiotic was stopped. This is the power of homeopathy that cured and saved my life which strong antibiotics failed.
Will you stop spreading hatred towards the Modi government?Homoeopathy is a proven Science. You have no right to ridicule it
Homoeopathy is a proven pseudo-science
Homeopathy is a pseudoscience if you believe what is written on the Wikipedia.
People with half knowledge of the subject claim to be experts and defame a brilliant methodology of treatment.
If you think homeopathy doesn’t work , it’s because you haven’t seen their papers .
Its because they don’t have that much time.
It started 7-8 years back and slowly slowly the whole system is becoming technologically advanced (case recording by cameras , audio recording , special tests etc ; in India) . Also HHF is the most famous homeopathic forum for doctors , go check it out
“Belief” is something,  proponents of homoeopathy work a lot with. In medicine the question is not about what one believes in,  but about what can be scientifically proven. Homoeopathy fails miserably in this. Despite addition of technology gimmicry,  study after study of the homeopathic papers come to the same conclusion- most of these papers have methodological issues. The ones that don’t, show that homoeopathy is little better than placebo and should not be used for serious diseases. This is precisely why many countries are beginning to either severely regulate or ban homoeopathy. And by the way,  you might want to check INH (The Homoeopathy Information Network) to get a dose of reality. You are of course free to, “believe ” in homoeopathy. There are people who still believe that the Earth is flat.
Do I have the right to spell it correctly?
Hahaha….. I believe we r the most scientific country in the world…..ha ha ha …..while rest of the world which doesn’t practice em are in dark ages….. Lol…..
Proven science…. LOLLLLL!!! 😀 😀 😀
it’s proven pseudoscience – brother.
I wish I could ridicule The Print and all these unaware and half cooked trolls who it is publishing; but doing so would be as good as giving undue mileage to all you guys! So, get in sync and line before it’s too late for you all! I still stopped to suggest something good to you or else your articles are not worth a dime and nobody should pay heed to them. Kind Regards….a ‘nationalist’ Indian.
Only homeopathy has d answer
I feel better to avoid travels.It is better to take pepper coffee alternate days.Avoid visiting theatres,Maals,and especially,drinking water.Daily cleaning the floor with with detail or any protective liquid.Avoid kissing each others.and better to check up throat if we feel discomfort.Swab test is better for throat.And use nasal drops at once if you sneeze
Wash your hands every now and then.
Homoeopathy is not pseudoscience,  it based on nature’s law of cure,  similia similibus curenter. Gov adviced it for preventing  corona virus infection, there is no need to built  hospital for prevention, yes is absolutely needed for treating patient who r already infected. pharma lobby made homoeopathy pseudoscience in  west. When exact symptoms of patient matches with homoeopathic  medicines symptoms  there is always cure happens, in curable diseases.  Vaccine work on same principle, as homoeopathy. dont be blind follower of western country,  those people having doubts on Homoeopathic medicine best way to test it, by taking treatment from good qualified Homoeopath. Yes homoeopathy works even no material dose in medicine, potentisation is the process to prepare homoeo.  Med.  ……..Symptoms (not disease) what it means, how u diagnose the case ,by means of symptoms , investigation r later part,  symptoms r primary n reliable way to diagnose any case, ask any good physician   symptoms, importance of symptom in any case.
This is a gem, “dont be blind follower of western country”. Homoeopathy originated in the West (Samuel Hahnemann was a German), so, by your own admission, we shouldn’t follow it. Homoeopathy is a pseudo-science mixed liberally with mumbo-jumbo (like the ones above). The sooner we understand it and discard it, the better it is for all of us.
No one asked you to take it. You are freed to not take. All blessings!
Of course I don’t take it. You should not recommend it for others in serious situations like this one, knowing fully that it is just a placebo.
At present government has openly declared as Allopathy has No vaccine, no definite cure for Coronovirus. People should understand the fact and come out of getting admitted in posh hospital by spending lakhs will save their life. When no cure for virus, what a doctor can do? Monitor, repeated regular fever medicines and lab test. Thats all.
I request never underestimate Ayurveda or homeopathy. Many dengue patients platlet count has incresed from 50000 to 1.5 lakhs in two days by papaya leaf extract. In many allopathy drs prescribe caripill (spelling may b wrong) a tablet contains papaya leaf extract for dengue patients.  Multi organ failure can be prevented by taking Sidha, homeopath medicine. Immune booster medicines also available. Thus preventing end of life as happens in many cases.
Nilavembu, Vellarugu, Karuvelam pattai kashayam helps reducing risk of coronovirus. Make…drink…then for satisfactiin get admitted in hospital…
I wish that you understand the fact that most allopathy medicines get raw materials from nature and plants itself…  Its raw form is studied by research and modified and developed further for better acceptance by the body…Hence the example of dengue patients taking caripill and calling it is only ayurveda is a quite absurd comment…
Very much right Sir, same in cases of Dengue tooo.
Its like ghar ki murgi daal barabar. Indians will always run after west.  When they have dengue they search for papayas leaves. In cold and cough they have tulsi and ginger tea. Still they think that ayurvedas, homeopathy is a crap and antibiotic are only saviour. Immunity system   get strenghened by naturopathy not allopathy
Homoeopathy came from the West. Looks like som eIndians are still running after it despite it being proven to be a c**p
