Don’t cut salaries or fire workers during lockdown  — Modi govt issues advisory
New Delhi: The Modi government has asked all public and private companies to ensure that they do not cut salaries of their staff or resort to layoffs of their employees amid the lockdowns imposed to curtail the spread of COVID-19.
Secretary of the Labour Ministry, Heeralal Samariya, sent out an advisory, in the form of a letter, in this regard Monday. “The world is facing a catastrophic situation due to the outbreak of COVID-19 and in order to combat this challenge, coordinated joint efforts of all sections of the society is required,” the letter reads.
“In view of the above, there may be incidence(s) that employees’/workers’ services are dispensed with on this pretext or the employee/worker is forced to go on leave without wage/salaries,” it adds.
The government has advised public and private enterprises to not terminate the services or reduce the wages of their employees, particularly casual or contractual workers.
As cases of COVID-19 rise in the country, several states have imposed lockdowns, restricting the movement of people even to their workplaces.
The advisory says that if any worker takes a leave, they should be deemed to be on duty without any deduction in wages. Doing so, the government has warned, would deepen the crisis.
“The termination of an employee from the job or reduction in wages in this scenario would further deepen the crises and will not only weaken the financial condition of the employee but also hamper their morale to combat their fight with this epidemic,” Samariya’s letter reads.
“In view of this, you are requested to issue necessary advisory to the employers/owners of all the establishments in the state.”
Also read: This is how the Indian military is trying to prevent COVID-19 from entering its bases
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Odisha govt fired 2 lakh contractual workers and there is no govt job for next 2 years…. inhuman culture in odisha..
I am 20 year old girl…my father is a govt employee in roadways department… Our salary did not come on time before lockdown
Our salary used to be delayed for three to four months..but during lockdown…We are facing a lot of problems.. please it’s a humble request to you that provide roadways salary in time
Mera naam vijaykumar Penke from Khopoli. Maine ek private limited company pe job kar raha hm(regular employ).sir muje aap se janakari chayi ye vo lockdown pe April and May and March maina ka 8days ka payment nahi diya hae. So mujhe legal action kaise apply kar ne ka hae yo be koun sa route se. Sir
Aur ek bath hae agar Management salaries nahi pay kar ne keliye Management kuch legal points dika Sakta  hae kya.
           Sir aap muje help kiji ye
I’m working in a public school in Meerut. From last month the school is pressuring me to give resignation. They said that if I will not give resignation, they will terminate me with out any notice period . Also they will not give me my security money which is deposited in school ie, one month salary. What can I do? I’m working their from last three years but school has not issued appointment letter also. There are other teachers like me and the same thing is happening to them also.
My husband is working in private small real estate company in mumbai chembur, they employer denied to pay anything for april and may and even gave half salary for march, now when my husband went to office after 10% staff asked to come on job, he was been told that they are removing him from job, and reasons are irrelevant. he had been rude and many other employees left job due to the owners behavior. we are facing lot of financial issues last 3 months and now neither i and my husband has a job to survive.
We wish to complain against him, action needs to be taken these employers has shown huge disrespect towards governments rules and obligations.
i want to file a case against his company, their license should get canceled.
I m working with private Ltd company with strengthen of 90 staff.and from last two month they r working with 30 percent staff and paying them only and the rest are not getting anything.
What to do.?
same has been done to me. If you or any one get contact no. Please share me
My no. Is 7021701287
Same as to me for may salary… I have working with Jiniguru Softech Pvt Ltd. In ahmedabad…
Action need to be taken.
I work in a pvt. Companies in mumbai, i didn’t got my salary from last 2 months, nor bills of my Internet are been paid by company.
Now they are forcing me to come to office n work. 
They can’t pay us our salary for the work i do, even i work extra but no salary, if i get infected or i get sick who will be responsible?? Who will my hospital bill??
I had not paid rent for 2 months, we don’t have enough money to pay bills…
What to do??
Any helpline available for such things??
I need my salary.
Action need to be taken.
I work in a pvt. Companies i didn’t got my salary from last 2 months, nor bills of my Internet are been paid by company.
Now they are forcing me to come to office n work. 
They can’t pay us our salary for the work i do, even i work extra but no salary, if i get infected or i get sick who will be responsible?? Who will my hospital bill??
I had not paid rent for 2 months, we don’t have enough money to pay bills…
What to do??
Any helpline available for such things??
I need my salary
Hi sir I’m working in privet company in Bangalore  because of covid 19 I came my hometown but now my company was forceing to me to give resignation letter so I’m depending my job and my family depending me but reason  company was saying  fiance issue, please help me sir,
My company does not paid me my March salary for which I worked  and  I am not getting work  after March and there is no other earning member in my family and I’m staying on rent..
Can u guys plz help..
What should be done ??
Will government provide some help in this situation??
My company is asking me to resign and in the resignation u wirte ur personal problems but when I don’t have any personal problems why should I resign company is keeping new staff who has joined a week before lockdown removing old staff who is working with them for 4 years . Can u tel m what to do
Hi, my company name is SS Buildtech Ventures Pvt Ltd Preet Vihar Delhi -92 . They Cut our Salary April and May also and They are not giving us march salary also please help us
Hi everyone!  Am Priya working as L1 Techincal support associate. My company name is Quberoot analytics which works for US client, my company has not provided me the basic facilities to work from home and forcing me to leave the organization. HR always speaks that they can show government that company is going loss and hence are terminating the employees. Any help regarding this would be greatly helpful until I find other job.
Good morning, this is Jane Anandita Samuel, I am writing from Aligarh,UP. I am working as a staff nurse in private hospital (Rajeev Gandhi cancer institute and research center), Delhi. As, I am the only person in my family whose earning bread for family, my parents is living in Aligarh. However, my mother is taking care of my father because he is not able to walk since 12 years due to an accident and also having a disease called Parkinson in which a person fully depends on other due to having tremors and loss of sensation in body.So, I came Aligarh to meet them, but stuck here due to lockdown and after putting so many efforts I still not getting any help to move from my home city Aligarh to Delhi and not having money to pay any driver. I regularly informed to my hospital that what situation I am facing here , even the financial crisis but they didn’t give me my salary of two months April and May. I don’t have money to buy food for us. However,one of the NGO here who feed poor, situation are that worst for us, I asked them to give us food. So, that I can feed my parents.
Hello, my boss fired me from work and gave me only 22 days money and said not to work with you because I did not work in lockdawn so
I’m working during lockdown but he doesn’t give me my salary I work on gaurd duty but how can I get back my salary my number 8810696840 company name is Scott security new French colony mother dairy
Indian govt is good in speaking a lot about the.  welfare of the people and making laws only on papers but when it comes on their implementation…. No one is bothered about….. About 50% of the total private employees are being neglected… Some are told to stay at home and will call you after the situation goes well… As their is no work we are redicing the staff temporarily, will call you when work will go in flow… What about their families?
Stop making new policies, govt.  Should look into this matter as soon as possible…who is responsible if their non implementation of orders???
Good morning to all,
As I am working in paints company as per Government guidance they need to pay the salary for the month of April and may but they are not ready to pay.
Why government is not able to take any action all there companies who are not paying it.
hi Im Kamesh , from chennai,
my company name is Apex visas (chennai branch) head office in pune, they had stopped the salary for april and may , they paid the partial salary for march , if asking to release the balance salary on april means they say that they will pay after the lock dowm opens, and also i have worked in the Wrok from group for april , bu they have not paid a single penny for that, we have inveested the internet wages , current comsuption chagers and even i rented the compter for work , even they have not paid these money also , AV Immigration PVT ltd ( Apex visas,) Really shame on the bosses and directors, where they are treating the workers as slaves, no one is to ask question , since coming for the job which is required, but they are using the suitation all the time, now they say that achieve the sales target in work from home and then they are asking to recieve the salary , they stopped the april salary the same way , kindly any Govt authorities or HUMAN RIGHTS OFFICERS KINDLY  HELP US NOW, WE ARE 6 MEMBERS IN THE BRANCH .
Respected sir
     I am working in a india pvt ltd company ( Maharastra). I am based at jammu and Kashmir.  During this epidemic company only pay me Rs 8600 in march salary and Rs 8600 in april salary . My salary is Rs 36000 per month. Also company ask me to work on commission basis from june month.
Can you please provide me any solution .
My WhatsApp no 9018111621
Sir/Mam
I am working in a private limited (Avinandan Fashion Pvt.Ltd.)  as a CRM, My Boss asked me to resign as they are not in situation in to continue with me. When I urgef for my pending salary (From March to till date I. Only get Rs.3000 in my account,  my salary is 11000/- only. Right now the owner ,he shoot me a massage on what’s ap
 “All account cleared upto march. Lockdown we are not paying anything other then advance to employees. If your account is due will clear post lockdown. Thanks. 🙏”
I am not able to understand getting kicked out of job and now getting less deducted salary does really help me.
Help here if anyone can…
Hi Sir I am working with an travel based company name SOTC Travel Services Pvt LTD. Now all of a sudden telling me to resign the job immedietely without giving any notice period. In this critical situation it will impact very badly on my family. Please suggest me.
I m working in private ltd company and company no provide salary for the month of april what to do pls help in written by whats up they inform me.
My wife was doing in Travel insurance pvt ltd company since last ten years as Operation manager(Promoted last year).But suddenly yesterday call came from her seniors to gave resigination forcefuly otherwise they would terminate her with help of HR and in that condition none full & final , EPF claim will be settled.Even my wife was working from home with full dedication upto late evening daily in lockdown also.
Because of this she is very depressed and her health is also not ok.Company is saying that they will gave next two month salary in advance if she would resigned herself so she had to given resigned yesterday under the great pressure of her four seniors.
My question is that can we knock the door of court to registed case against company and can we claimed for renumaration atleast of her one year salary ??
Dear sir
I’m working in kotak mahindra bank associate.
Today is my termination no notice period name mail direct termination.
I’m case or company & boss .
Please request my problem solve.
 Mai ghar me nahi rahta mai apne ghar se door  Raipur CG me rahta hu mera ghar satna mp me hai yha paas mujhe ab job se nikal diya hai room ka rent, or meri EMI BHI jati hai electric city ka bil  sabhi jate hai or kharche bhi hai aise time me direct termination karna ke liye case karna hai mujhe please request hai meri help kare
I’m working in private company indoline industries pvt Ltd nashik maharashtra that they are saying that we cant pay the salary so we have do full and final settlement and pressurise to me give resign plz help me sir
Sir I’m working in private company that they are saying that we cant pay the salary so we have do full and final settlement so wat to do sir plz help us sir
Hello sir,
  I work in a private company in Ahmedabad.  They didn’t pay my April salary because I didn’t come to work because of the lockdown.  The admin clearly states that you will not receive your April salary because you have not worked for the entire month.
same has been done to me. april salary has cut down.
Hi
I working in Delhi company not given my full salary of march month they hold 10 days salary and clearly says not any payment in all lockdown time they put us on leave till lockdown company not reliased any staff salary everyone is in trouble plz help us
Regards
Manisha
We have been laid off  they took resignation from us forcibly  They have not even paid the EPF since a year This is a second organisation which i have worked is doing so No job No money to pay
Can govt look into the matter.
We have been laid off, they took resignation from us forcibly. They have not even paid the EPF since a year. This is a second organisation which i have worked is doing so. No job , No money to pay??? Can govt look into the matter.
Sir , I am in jammu , work ing with uflex ltd  . I am asthama patient , I did not go to compny in April due to  lockdown  and helth issue. My company cut my ful sellry of April . Pls help me , why did you add this advisory if compny denied .
Company is not pay anything of April month salary.
Please help me how I survived with my family.
I am a single mamber of my family which is earning.
Please help me
The truth is that No body is helping in such situation, not also Modiji. They are just making such announcements but never ask us what our company is doing with us abt lockdown salary/ salary cut/ job loss. Comman man like us are much suffering & yet cant do anything.Regret Yaar.
My company denied to pay our salary since Feb. As we are asking so they denied due to lockdown and threatened us.
What we do now ? It’s a survival question for us. Anybody help .  Govt email or contact no please share
Employers are also finding very difficult to pay salaries to their employees during lockdown, in spite of their best intentions to pay. I think 25%deduction in salary can be a win win situation for both. No Layoffs. These times of mutual cooperation will be remembered all life.
Hi im working in nestaway as an agent but I’ve been working as many things in company and i do completely and my boss calls me and says on may 6th to leave and resign at this pandemic situation im the only one working at my place how do i have to support my family and financially im really weak and im asked to resign please help my name is mohammed zeeshan
Hello sir gud afternoon
 I’m working in a private company in (raipur) , I received only 70% off basic salary of march month n my boss refuse to gave ur salary till lockdown. his saying that if want money you will take from me but as a advance. its almost may month how should we survived sir plz help us sir plz we have no money sir plz. he refused to give us salary.
Sir/Madam,
I am sorry to tell that during this crisis period our country is going  my owner has sacked me telling me not to go to the office from 23.03.2020. He gave me the salary only upto 21.03.2020 on the 24.04.2020 only after requesting my owner that mother has expired on the 09.04.2020.
Please suggest what should I do now ? I am a patient whose approx 50% left kidney is removed which had a tumor which was diagnosed malignant in Sep, 2018 . I have to be in constant treatment and observation to both Urologist & Oncologist.
Regards
Abhijeet Chakrabarty
Dear Sir
I am a fashion designer who works in a company called  Janton and Kommal Sood at Park St in Kolkata.
The name of the owner is Mr. RATUL SOOD  company
cst number  19431551288
PAN number AACFJ4506E
The company is denying to pay us last three months viz march april may salary. I know Modiji had passes out advisory  about clear payments during lockdown.. 
In this respect I wish to complaint to the cell dealing with this sort of problem.. We need a number where we can complaint aboit it directly.. 
Regards
Subrata Bhaduri
I am working as a assistant manager account & finance in a KENT RO SYSTEM.
MY BOSS HAS CALLED ME ON 1ST MAY ASK ME TO LEAVE ……
PLEASE HELP …….
Hi sir,  I work in a private company in gurgaon . They didn’t pay my may month salary because I did not attend the office because of lock down.
I working in Delhi ,, not given my salary of march month ..and clearly says ,,not any payment in all lockdown time ……plz. help me any contact numbers or complaint number plz….
I think Government can workout a plan by allowing employer to set off salary paid to employees against the Income Tax / GST or can announce that 50% salary to be paid as there has been no business and same will be benefitted under tax
I am Working in Bajaj finance Today My Manager asked me to resign as they are not in situation in to continue with me. When I urged a lot they simply leaves a choice in front of me to resign
Hi I am working in udaan.com in Delhi my manager call me suddenly you are not coming in office so we are firing you and they are not giving me the salary for the month of march
Sir I working in a company not paid me salaried I and my mom stays no work from home option  please do some need full help
I anita pillay last 20 year working as a peon in govt school kirkee cantonment board & I am permanent employ ,my principal told whenever school will reopen will call u, on 27 April I called her same  reply, payment issue from k. C.b .now my payment is deducted from April due to absence, my husband is also jobless during lockdown, my family depends on me, all responsible is on me, how we will survive, plz reply us .
Helloo sir I am working in chandan hospital in post of pharmacist .and in that time I am stuck in lockdown and that’s why I am not coming in hospital .and my sallery in March are hold and also give a some days an absconding letter .but I was informed that my manager and coordinator also but still give the letter of absconding and also told me that give a resignation.please help me sir it aslo happen in so many employee in hospital.8318741633
Sir i am working in infinity data entry at solapur they are not providing salary to us what we should do there is nothing to do for survival please help us
Hello sir,I am working in private school.We (private teachers)are suffering during lockdown, not taking tuition  to meet our expenses to avoid spread but we are not getting salary also,the school also depend on parents (fee),how school management could give,you are doing great work for our country but please look on this matter also..
I’m working in the rig brewery company not giving salary February and March not giving salary ??
There is nothing to eat at home and my family room stays in the rent.  Campany have not paid salary Please help me.??
Dear sir
I am working in private comapny they did not give salary for this month.
Request all victims to post your problem on Twitter on urgent basis.  Twitter is very active now and also send mails to media Or news agencies. They will help you to spread your message. Post on Twitter and tag government, pm and other media channels. May be it will help.  Dun forgot to tag labour ministry… They may help you. 
If you will sit , same thing will happen with other employees!! Raise your voice!!
I am Abhishek Vijay Indore I was working in Shubham Civil Project Pvt Ltd Pune .In times of lockdown I got a sudden call on 20 April 2020 from the office that your performance is not good. You talk to your project manager and hand over. We are firing you. And since February my salary has not been paid, plz help me what to do and this is my number 8208230395
Can anyone tell me what we private school teachers should do when school management denies to pay our march salary as well as april salary during lockdown. They says we didn’t get fee from students so will have to manage.Now how we are going to manage if we are totally dependent on our job itself.kindly guide.
Good evening sir, I have a doubt plus issue too. I am a simple parent mother. I resigned with my previous company and I am going to join new company on 4th April 2020 I have my offer letter also every thing is fixed but due to lockdown I can’t join my new company so the issue is that should I got my salary? Because I have to pay my child school fee his van drivers demand for a van fee and lots of other expenses. Kindly suggest me the next step of action ? What to do ? Should I ask with my HR for my salary but on other hand I am not working from home just becoz that company is new to me….. Pls pls help me what to do ?
Good evening sir, myself Anju Sharma.
Working in pvt organization of cloud point technologies pvt.ltd. located at noida sec-63./ Its almost April 22nd I still didn’t get my salary of march month..I ask for salary but they always say wait for one day but company not providing salary..plz help me in regarding this..
Any Center or Delhi govt official notification for salary paid in lockdown my employer want notification after that they give me salary for the month of March plzz plz provide
Dear Sir ,.                                                                                         I m working a construction company Risheek Automotive Sany Dealer he was fire to me dated. 21.4.20 Address – 2/477 o Lucknow my wife delivery next month I m suffered in financial crises my total due amt in company account 117000/- please help me. Mobile no-8400838569
In this Banana republic everything is funny and exploitive to industries and businesses. After investing crores we have to obey the orders of misfits and freebooters  who have never understood the problems of industries and businesses.
These guys have learnt to talk like goons always threatening businesses and industries to pay full wages to employees. What is Govt. contribution after 2014 to industries and businesses. Only torture in the name ache dins.  This Govt. will not see goods days as I his Govt. has troubled  everyone in this country except its friends.  People ,businesses and industries are  so frustrated with this tall talks ache din govt. which has screwed up everything that was good.
If this Govt. can do good to people,businesses and industries it can remain till people oust in the next elections. Otherwise should accept its failure to deliver the goods and must go. A country like India cannot be run pathetically like this.
In this Banana republic everything is funny and exploitive to industries and businesses. After investing crores we have to obey the orders of misfits and freebooters  who have never understood the problems of industries and businesses.
These guys have learnt to talk like goons always threatening businesses and industries to pay full wages to employees. What is Govt. contribution after 2014 to industries and businesses. Only torture in the name ache dins.  This Govt. will not see goods days as I his Govt. has troubled  everyone in this country except its friends.  People ,businesses and industries are  so frustrated with this tall talks ache din govt. which has screwed up everything that was good.
If this Govt. can do good to people,businesses and industries it can remain till people oust in the next elections. Otherwise should accept its failure to deliver the goods and must go. A country like India cannot be run pathetically like this.
Hello sir I am working in a private firm in Delhi and my employer giving me suddenly a termination letter without any warning. During lock down I was  Continue working from home and everything go well but suddenly my HR give me termination letter as the reason mention for performance issue.
During lock down how to find next job. Please help what to do.
Sir meri salary marh ki nhi de raha shop kippar boll raha jab opne hogi uske bad bat karenge
I am from ahemedabad and i m doing job in college i m also not getting my two month salaries ( march, april)  what should i do plz help us They told us that if government povide us than we will pay they denied to give salary please advice
Companies are now playing very Chalu types:-
1. Forceing and threatning staff to go on EL or salary cut,
2. Employee should agree on Salary cut as contribution or they will terminate after lockdown,
3. Not even paying full salary of March 2020.
Private firms are taking it as opportunity to Sack employee and Save Huge Money.
My company is also on same Pitch.Shame on all.
Namaskar sir sir hum sab noida me job karte hai ministry of sound club me .Abhi tak hamare malik ne sum sab ko paise nhi diye gm sir se bat ki to bole paise nhi h abhi nhi milega hum sab yaha paresan h
Working with Tp Bpo industry as an agent, Company marking forcefully Unplanned leaves forcefully of all the employees in my batch. As all the revenue is generated in Bpo is By agents and at this crucial time they are deducting the salary of agents only. Most of the guys are away from their homes so its a responsibility of company to take of their employees at this crucial time period. If they not able to provide the work from home facility its not agent’s fault. Please help us for this
Hi  This is Asha
Working in pvt organization of dental clinic in orthosquare Its almost April 20th I still didn’t get my salary of march month
I ask for salary all the time but he ask to first open the clinic after that he give the salary at the 25or28
Overall room owner ask for rent also and helpless for all those things
Please help us out all of this
Thanks
Am a teacher from Bangalore my school is paying me salary and they have said that they will not be able to pay until August… now who will talk for us either take a n action or the school and government will be responsible for my and my 3 kids suicide…am going through hell lot of problems…here
Brother please don’t do that , this will let harm to your children only if government is not helping you then I will help u sure
Respected sir , I am working in bpo sector the company name is one assist Pvt Ltd talent pro HR india pvt ltd and they suddenly said we are going to rampdown the process and removed 50% employee due to covid 19 causes and  it’s very difficult to find out the new job due to lockdown And our financial condition is not good so please take action against the company and i hope u will reply positively.
Respected sir , I am working in bpo sector the company name is one assist Pvt Ltd (talent pro HR india pvt ltd) and they suddenly said we are going to rampdown the process and removed 50% employee due to covid 19 causes and  it’s very difficult to find out the new job due to lockdown And our financial condition is not good so please take action against the company and i hope u will reply positively.
respected sir.
   I m working in choice broking fir. I join the company in March month and working there till lock down but after 22 March my boss give me lockdown Leave but right now he is not give me a single coin for my hard work plz do something i m from very poor family we need essential and grossery but i don’t have money please do something sir i request to you sir
Hi Sir/Maam,
I am working with pvt company at Gurgaon, and still I did not get my march salary, and my company terminate me due to Covid19 and lock-down. And instant of given me a salary my company ask me to reign other wise we will terminate you.
I have my family and and i am the only one member in my family who is earning but due to Lock-down I lost my job to.
They said to me company do not have fund to give you salary, you will not get the salary as weather you work or not.
However, as per Government law it was been confirmed due to Covid-19 lockdown, people can get an advantage to work from home if the company allows.
I think there is no value of our PM Mr. Narender Moji ji.
Kinldy response what we can do.
Regards
Ashok
Companies are not paying us salary. Apart from this..my company didn’t pay my salary from janfeb and march is also due.  What to do..where to complain. Please help us how to run our house and childrens school fees electricity bills etc.
Companies are not terminating but they are also not paying us salary. Apart from this..my company didn’t pay my salary from janfeb and march is also due.  What to do..where to complain. Please help us how to run our house and childrens school fees electricity bills etc.
I am from new delhi I am working in private Ltd company and they text me-(Date 23 Mar 2020 Notice
You are hereby informed that due to lockdown declared by the Govt. in view of epidemic Covid 19 Corona Virus, the company has completely closed its operation w.e.f 23 Mar 2020 for an indefinite period and company shall contact/communicate to you when its operation would be commenced. Please take notice accordingly and no separate notice or communication would be made in this regard. Please note that during this lockdown period you shall be treated at leave without any pay.
Yours Truly
HR dept
Teleone Consumers Product Pvt. Ltd.) Please help us
Hello i m working in a private company in delhi and till now my company hasnt paid our salary in this lockdown  and the service charge for the past 3 months  n it would be helpful if u hepled me out
I am belongs From bihar
I am working in pvt ltd company but company are not provide sallery and termination letter provide today so please help me
I am leaving on rent and company not provide salary and terminate also
My company (altruistindia pvt ltd, chennai) already informed us that they are not going to pay the salary for the month april. Im from uttar pradesh and i stay in chennai in pg. Due to lockdown im in my home town. My hostel owner asking me to pay the rent even though i havent stayed there since 2 month. Please somebody help me out with the resolution.
Employees can reach out to the  labour control room in their region to lodge their grievance in case of pay cut, forced resignation, layoff, termination or any illegal labour practice. lawcovid19.blogspot.com
Our company deducted our more than half of the salary of april month….please help me out bcz they are not replying or giving any information that the rest of the salary will be paid or not. Salary date is 10 but they gave on 15 april after waiting for long they deducted more than half of the salary….what to do sir/mam please help us out
Our company Apsara Silks in Bengalore is doing deduction in our salary because of covid 19.It means they didn’t follow and accept the govt advisor .so what we can do now .I am staying in Pg and I hve to pay rent where from I vll get it.write now it is responsibility of our company to take care of their employees but they playing with our moral and espically in such covid 19 pandemic
You should tweet pmo for this deviation against gov advisory
My company told me that they can not cut salary during Lockdown but they cut our CL PL AND SL Leave in next year 2020/2021 and manage our next month’s salary  means after Lockdown total 9 months we are going on duty compulsory without leave,how can it’s possible sir?
Hi sir
         my name is Prayag gogiya  i am belong to midel class family my company in my salry cut this lockdown period      please help me
Hello Sir I Am Akash Gupta I am working in Oriel Finance Pvt ltd in Gurgaon Haryana.. In This time I am Working In Home As per a Company policy But Company is Pay My Salary and in This Time My Situation is very Critical plese sir Help me .
Name Akash Gupta
Contact Number – 7268919130
मा बिपीन मरीन सव्हि्सेस
     जे ़डब्लु ़आर  सी एफ एस
विषय- माचॆ व एफि्ल महीन्या  च्या पगारा बाबत ़
महोदय-कोरोना विषानु मुळे आपल्या महाराष्ट्रात लाॅकडाउन केल्या मुळे बिपीन मरीन च्या सवॆ कामगाराना कळविण्यात येते की माचॆ महिन्याचा पगार हा दोन टप्यात देण्यात येईल। ५०% ह्या
 महिण्यात देण्यात यईल। व ५०% लाॅकडाउन संपल्यानंतर देण्यात येईल। तसेच एफ्रिल महिण्याचा पगार हा जो कामगार ज्या ज्या दिवसी कामावर हजर आसेल त्याच दिवसाचा पगार काढण्यात येईल ।।
 याची सवॆानी नोंद करून घ्यावी।।
                        कळावे
          माः आध्यक्ष बि डी पाटील   सर
I see many people complaining here about their company fired them in lockdown
But no one has answered it.
I too have faced the same issue but now looking at all of us comment
I have lost hope too for the reason there is no value to our PMs words nor any discipline in Central government action. 
#Shame
Companies are not terminating but they are also not paying us salary. Apart from this..my company didn’t pay my salary. What to do..where to complain. Please help us as this is a very common problem.
hi
i am working in a private limited company since 5 years and my company is refuse to pay my salary till lockdown also there is no other earning member in my family and i am staying on rent.
Urban clap fired me after lockdown they said they already decided to fired me but they didn’t give any notice by 28th they call me and said they will fired me.
Every one know in this lockdown no company will give job
Hi I’m working one of the company In BANGALORE karnataka due to covid 19 they have removed me and some employees from job reason financial reason what I should do so that I can speck with them can I get any notification of legal notice so that I’ll show to them that they should not remove any employee please someone help me help me pls
Hi sir/mam 
This is bhavani from Bangalore. Just know I got a call from my company were there r saying that they r remove me and my team from the company .only I’m wrkin in my home to take care of my family I need a salary sir/mam 
Plz help me wer can I contact to tell about r company last month also they paid as 50% of are salary. When we asked they said government as information to pay only 50%.
We don’t ask him anything more . But now they called as and told plz dnt wrk from home shop work they told.
Please help me out
This is shruti Srivastava from greater noida I also got the confirmation of getting fired by the company n didnt get the salary yet plz tell me whom sud I connect to
I’m working in St. Xavier public school Jaipur. my school director deduct my salary in lock down time duration where should I compliant against the organisation please help .
I am working in a prop.  Ship firm in Faridabad. Our March salary not received full. Any way to receive full salary
Dear Sir/Madam,
I am an employee of a Pvt. Ltd. Company based in Odisha. My employer paid us salary for the month of March 2020. And declared that if the lockdown will be over by 14th of April 2020 then he will pay 50% salary but unfortunately it was extended upto the end of April. Now he is not willing to pay anything for the month of April 2020.
Please advise what to do?
Is this law applicable in Odisha too?
Thanks
Yes. You are entitled for the payment.
Yes. You are entitled for the payment. Odisha govt has given an advisory in this regard.
Company base in West bangol I m working in Delhi NCR now company don’t gives our salary and first April they gives order we are on leave without pay this company shot this mail on 8 April when I ask my salary this company never follow ministery order any one help me how can I get my salary from company any mail or number to complent against this behavior of company
Me & my husband company not giving salary . & They will not give next 2 months also apart from that we have submitterd 3 months schook fees also. We are rented  & paying EMI  also. Plz help. If we will not salry so will we survive…biba Corona ke hi mar jaenge…
Me & my husband company not giving salary . & They will not give next 2 months also apart from that we have submitterd 3 months schook fees also. We are rented  & paying EMI  also. Plz help. If we will not salry so will we survive…biba Corona ke hi mar jaenge…
Here’s an article on legal obligation of businesses be forced by government to pay or NOT to pay the Salary:
http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/opinion/what-are-the-legal-obligations-to-pay-wages-during-a-lockdown/article31262286.ece/amp/
Here’s an article on legal obligation of businesses be forced by government to pay or NOT to pay the Salary:
https://www.google.com/amp/s/www.thehindubusinessline.com/opinion/what-are-the-legal-obligations-to-pay-wages-during-a-lockdown/article31262286.ece/amp/
Here you have stated salary fully paid for public and private companies but what about LLP companies As the intimation got from company is they pay march salary but if the lockdown continue April no salary will be paid How do we live with out salary From a middle class family I am really bothered how to survive
Here you have stated salary fully paid for public and private companies but what about LLP companies. As the intimation got from company is they pay march salary but if the lockdown continue April no salary will be paid. How do we live with out salary. From a middle class family I am really bothered how to survive
Hi, I am working on Pvt company in Gurgaon. This is a hotel. Due to lockdown hotel is closed form last month and company sent all employees on without paid leave. Now as par govt. All company should be paid the salaries to all employees.  Now my question is can we get the salary and if company don’t pay the salary than what can we do. I am staying on rent and we totally depends on my monthly salary.
Kindly advise.
Sir…i am working in govt sector on contact basis..I am stucked at ny home town due to lock down..now my employer se t me show cause notice and even after given genuine valid reason…he has terminated me…what to do??
I am working in a company in mohali (qservices Inc)
They are giving March 2020 salary in 15 April hopefully
Which is not full 50% giving
Please suggest what to do
I have been told by my company to work for home for which i need a laptop. Suddenly how can i arrange a laptop. that’s why they are not giving me the salary of lockdown period.please suggest something where can i file a complaint against it.
Persons who have not done any major business or run industries can give free advice to collect their salaries . Guys who were doing portable business may also advise to give full salary to employees during lockdown.
But from where industries and businesses will get money to pay salaries as grant or doles.  Businesses do not have support of Ambani or Adani to help as to win elections!!!  It is hard earned money for businesses to pay through the nose.  Ever since we have jinxed from 2016 no one has recovered .  Businesses have closed down. Now with Covid 19 many employees will lose jobs and businesses will close down. Let Govt. absorb all displaced workers and owners.  We have very kind hearted leaders to help.
Hi
I am working in Mumbai in Software support domain since last 3 year.
Now, due to Corona virus disease, I am in my home.
But as I am in support department I am supporting to our clients on phone calls.
Now my Team leader and management is saying you just arrange laptop or pc for WFH otherwise company will not pay you salary.
Now what should I do .
Somebody plz help me out
I am working in bpo at mumbai, the company is temperory terminated us last ² days and even I didn’t receive salay for mar and April . And they said no work no pay. I was only one person who is earning at my home. U guys need to help me and solve or let me where can I raise these complaint
I am working in bpo at mumbai, the company is tempory terminated us last ² days and even I didn’t receive salay for mar and April . And they said no work no pay. I was only one person who is earning at my home. U guys need to help me and solve or let me where can I raise these complaint
I was working in a govt. Office on contract, as a young professional. And my contract was till 31st march between the lock down, and that contract may be extend but now they are refusing to increase the contract. Tell me what to do?
Hi
Iam working with outsourcing company,  iam in bench period and i have paid for Jan and Feb but For march i didn’t paid, will i ask them  to pay for March because of loockdown.
Hi 
I am working with one company and they fired so many people during this lockdown reasone they gave performance is not good .till six month they were didn’t told anything regarding performance suddenly they told this and told like this is ur last day .what should I do
Sir i was in resignation period nd during this lockdown came nd my salary is hold any options from this
I am working in a bpo
I haven’t received march salary
I was told that I won’t even get April salary
How should we survive with the family.please make all bpo to release the salaries of the employees so that no employee will suffer from lockdown.please take it into priority and resolve the issue.
Hi I’m from mumbai. I work for slimming center ( Prettislim clinic ) company is giving basic salary from 1st march to 20th march and because of Corona it has been lockdown from 21st till 14april … As per the government declared to give at least basic salary but the company is giving 11623 per month … So they are deducting my salary also with if the lockdown gets over then too they gonna do the same …. This is what I have been worked hard with company and how there is no humanity ….
Hi I’m from mumbai. I work for slimming center ( Prettislim clinic ) company is giving basic salary from 1st march to 20th march and because of Corona it has been lockdown from 21st till 14april … As per the government declared to give at least basic salary but the company is giving 11623 per month … So they are deducting my salary also with if the lockdown gets over then too they gonna do the same …. This is what I have been worked hard with company and how there is no humanity ….
Dear sir
I am working in k2 india company saket Delhi they are not paying salary during the Lockdown when I asked management said due to crisis not going to pay.please suggest
You can send a notice to your employer (email is fine) – you can attach a copy of the Delhi notification in your notice – It says that employers have to pay the salary of all employees whether contract/permanent.    http://health.delhigovt.nic.in/wps/wcm/connect/deaf86804da4c3bb8687f7982ee7a5c7/lock.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&lmod=48689189&CACHEID=deaf86804da4c3bb8687f7982ee7a5c7
[https://lawcovid19.blogspot.com/]
I am working in BuzzWorks Business Private Limited Company. My company’s hr department and my seniors are fire to job,they have create force on me for resignation,I hv no other income.If I resigned my job than how can I survive me and my family.I request to company that he doesn’t fire to job,if they want that I can work with minimum salary (basic salry) till the lock down situation.plz take action
Employers cannot force you to resign – https://lawcovid19.blogspot.com/
Hi..
I working in Delhi, company not given my full salary of march month they hold 10 days salary and clearly says not any payment in all lockdown time
They put us on leave till lockdown company not reliased any staff salary everyone is in trouble plz help us
Company name idcm  in mumbai Andheri ( East )  is company dissolved on 23 March 2020 by providing msg on whatsapp  not provide any official mail to any employee  not paid any salary also  what to do in critical condition covid 19
Company name idcm  in mumbai Andheri ( East )  is terminating employees ( Me also terminated) LOCKDOWN and giving the reason that company business is less due to Corona crisis
I work for a private limited company in Kolkata Park Street area (west bengal). We are approx 60 people of staff and our company giving deduction in salary during the lockdown period. So we all staff are requesting to government that please take some positive steps for this matter.
Thank You
Your employer cannot do that during the lockdown.  https://lawcovid19.blogspot.com/?view=classic
Hi , 
Company in Noida (Provana) is terminating employees ( Me also terminated) LOCKDOWN and giving the reason that company business is less due to Corona crisis.
What we can do ? 
Please help
Your employer cannot do that during the lockdown. http://shasanadesh.up.gov.in/GO/ViewGOPDF_list_user.aspx?id1=OSMyMSMzIzIwMjA=
https://lawcovid19.blogspot.com/?view=classic
my company said that they will not pay any salary till June’20 as company faced financial crisis during lockdown and also said if you can you may leave from company .I have home loan, personal loan and credit cards and I dont know how will I pay this. my situation is very worse which i cant explain. Kindly help me out and advice what should I do. …
I agree with the situation.
I am a employer. I have Manufacturing shop. I have 38 Peoples in staff.
in this situation, employee & employer both are in loss. No work No revenue generate.
by mutual understanding of both 50% Salary.
equal Loss.
In future when situation in well conditions financial loss of employee will be covered.
It is a time to co operate each other.
Yes. To those employees with clean attendance record. For habitual absentees and irregular workers no salaries to be paid as they never worked with seriousness.
I have been terminated from the company last night just because I’ve asked for my payment on company group, because no one was responding towards my messages on personal so. I have messaged them on group and they terminated me for this reason, during tbis lockdown company are not helping us they giving us more pressure.
I’ll show what they have emailed me above 
Dear Mr Aaqib Kureshi,
      Through this letter we want to inform you about your termination
from the position of Sr.Research Analyst.
      We have been observing your behavior from the time you have joined
the organisation.  You were giving a verbal warning for the last
instance and even after that you continue with the same attitude and
behaviour in the office and towards its employees and management, now we
have come to this decision that we are terminating you on the grounds of
not following the company rules and policy which are to be followed by
all the company employees. All your dues apart from your incentives
would be cleared in  45 days.
      If you have questions about this letter please contact Rini Marian
or Ayush Jaitly. We would like to thank you for your contribution and we
wish you all the best for the future.
Yours,
Swati Mahajan
HR Department
Linkland markets Pvt Ltd.
Viman nagar ● Pune ● 411014 ● Maharashtra ● India ●
http://www.linklandmarkets.com
Our company in noida sector 6 asked the employee to put the resignation bcoz of covid 19. Very bad situation. Govt asked and declare both public and private organisation not to fire the employees but the fact is completely different. Just 10-15 days of lockdown the company is asking the employee to put the resignation. What to do now?
Your company cannot terminate you. See the Noida notification – http://shasanadesh.up.gov.in/GO/ViewGOPDF_list_user.aspx?id1=OSMyMSMzIzIwMjA=
https://lawcovid19.blogspot.com/?view=classic
Hi
My company name is in Bangalore silverline diagnostics in kammanahalli.. due to lockdown they are not paying salary, entire situation they are not understanding though they are in medical field so I request to advise that company and explain the situation .. unnecessary staff are suffering
I’m also facing the same problem as you’re facing.. As govet give advisory to all small and large scale employer don’t cut the salary of worker, we can take action against this unfair behave.. If you wish to join me plz call or WhatsApp me on this number 8168594677
I have recently join an organisation name Inspiring Education in kolkata near Birla planetarium on 11th of March and due to lockdown the company owner said we have to report on 1 April to office but today I have got a call and received a email that company is terminating us. Now in this situation what should I do ?
Brainworks Solution  the company from vadodara. Also giving deduction in salary during the lockdown period.
Which business man will give salary for the work not done. Only perpetual borrowers who they their position to some cheats will ask you to pay salary for the days not worked and during lock down.
We have had enough with this novice Govt. experimenting their knowledge with SSME and MSME.  India will not at prosper at the present dispensation.  Like monkey’s will be paying highest taxes for everything when others are enjoying on foreign trips and entertaining foreign guests with taxes paid money of Indians.
There is no level playing ground for business people to invest as there are incentives but only tirmentations by the Govt.  Which law says to give salaries for the days not worked or work not done.  After NDA took over whole world knows the economic conditions of SSI’s and MSME’s.  Govt. should give one time poison to all business people and industries instead of giving slow poison from time to time.  India has never seen a worst economic situation after independence like this even when minority Govt. headed  by late Chandrashekar was much much better.  All of them had ears to listen and not a deaf and dumb Govt. of today.
PM has not take care of citizens.
I have lost my Salary from 23 march 2020 an worried about the home and expenses
My company Manisha Laboratory in Mumbai Malad west charkop has didn’t ever asked how are we going through. I have a small dauther who ask for parle G, Milk,Maggie and rice
Z 1 Media, Phase 4, Gurugram has asked employees to write an resignation letter/mail without any prior notice period.
What do we do in this time of crisis?! Where do we go? They are not even paying us the salary for the month that we have last worked.
I have been working with “AEGIS in Gurgaon udhyog vihar” which is now “STARTEK”. Work from home advisory passed on 15th April,2020 due to cov-19 but our company asked to work till 21st, april 2020 in a crowd of hundered’s, which was dead risky for us and took no action in this regard. Now they have been using all our “paid leaves” to save their revenue and people who don’t have any leaves will not be paid for these days and we will not be able to take any further leaves in future. Pls do something as these companies r doing nothing for their employees. Today they have sent us an email saying need to report from 1st of may. Seems like they don’t care about human lives and government laws so not to talk about advisories and request.
I’m working with M&M Machine Craft Pvt. Ltd., Kherki Daula, Gurgaon.
Company is deducting salary during National Lockdown declared by our Prime Minister due to COVID-19.
 Why would only an employee bare all the losses. It is important to be in home for every individual and yes it is important for the company also.
Companies can atleast do this much to their employees.
Our company napino auto and electronics limited deducted our salarys. its in manesar gurugram.
Shree partners company, Gurgaon Udyog vihar phase 4 has asked employees to draft a resignation mail due to covid-19 and only giving a notice period of 15 days.
More than 50 -60 employees has been asked to do so.
In this critical situation where the companies are supporting there employees and give wfh, and on continuous effort by pm/pmo/hrd to not terminate or remove employees, these kind of companies are putting the hell situation Infront of employees rather than to support them.
God knows who will come Infront and support in this situation.
No private company is even bothered to what the PM of India is saying.
We have not received the salary for the month of March and Company has communicated on Email that they will Pay 50% salary of March and April even though we have worked till 21st March and after lockdown we are continuously been forced to work from home till date else they will not pay the salary for the month of March as well.  
No actions are been taken by the Government against such private companies.
Company Name- Redcliffe Lifescience Pvt Ltd
Company name : Concentrix, Gurugram  ( DLF phase 3, Cyberhub )
They made new policy, comes into effect from 1st April 
They are not giving paid leave to employees, if agents are not able to come office from 1st April they will deduct leave  and they are not following the orders of Labour Ministry.
When we contact company manager or supervisor, they told they will deliver the PCs before 31st, but for the workers who currently not in NCR, they won’t get the system and they can not work from home by using personal laptop because of security purpose. 
So, employees who are not available in NCR location would not get any special leaves from company side , even we can not go back to office location to get the PCs  due to locked down situation.
Please contact our company if you can do anything for us, who are locked down at home right now and not able to get the system from office.
I work at dmart and i am stuck at kalyan to relatives place. The officers are now asking me continuously to join the job. I told them that train are closed and she’s saying to ask someone to take u to the workplace. And say that now HR will talk to regarding  the job. What should i do she’s now forcing me to leave the job or coming to job
I work for a private company in Noida sec 58. We are approx 60 people of staff and our company is not giving us our salary for jan and  Februar , reason given LOCKDOWN. kindly take action against them
Hi, I have read many interesting and valuable concerns of so many officers. It’s not the pandemic of NCoV, but even if the situation had not been this worse, situations do creep in where employees are forced to resign or get terminated due to internal crisis within organisations.
Please trust on Modi Government and kindly wait for further statutory orders for non deduction of salaries issued for the Pvt Ltd, Ltd, LLP, OPC and Public Ltd Companies, which are registered with MCA
This pandemic is a force majeure and not an adequate time for any manpower retrenchment.
Please contact MCA or your Company’s HRD for the same and ask them for written orders which in turn can be contested in the  Courts of Law
Some people don’t have white ration cards to take help from government they was rejected they dont have pension also.they work for daily wages and now their business are closed they dont know what to do in this time.in that my family is one ya government doing better but what about this people how they get helped
I want know this I have joind job on 15-3-2020 and the lock down was started from 21-3-2020 il get salary or not..
Some people dont have ration cards also to take rice and money from government and they have daily wages of business and they dont have pension also what the people look for now sir in that my family is 0ne ya government doing better but what abou this people they dont any income now  they don’t know what to do
I am Arijit Roy residing in Kolkata I have been working in a Travel Agency company since couple of years, currently we are doing work from home but the problem started today evening when my Manager asked me to follow something which I did & informed him of the outcome of that so what he did he started yelling at me without any valid reason & tried to deviate the conversation & use it against me,  he used his powers wrongly & blocked my login credentials, so I am left with no updates as he is not answering my calls not even I am getting any support from the HR, in this situation where we don’t know what is going to happen tomorrow I cannot compromise with my Job despite of being correct, I have all the evidences available with me to which may highlight the exact issue, as I don’t know who to approach please help me in this regards because I have a family to look after & a table to serve.
completely understand the situation .
both the company and the employee is in loss.
hence it would be fair enough to share equal losses by both the employer and the employee i.e., 50-50% right.
it is not fair to ask the employee to take his leave by force. managers hesitate to give a single day leave anytime wen it’s required but now saying not to worry and take leaves until situation becomes normal. 
why would only an employee bare all the losses. yes it is important to be in home for every individual and yes it is important for the company also .
consider half day leave for one day lockdown .. atleast it can workout like this right. companies can atleast do this much to their employees.
govt cannot think this much also…
I am an employe of cbsl in kolkata center..they people are saying if we people not working in the lockdown they will deduct tha salary..sir compny have 900 empleye ..if we people do not get salary how can we pay the room rent ..and how can we eat
I’m also working for this metal industrial company in rustenburg.
We have been given notice letter to notify us that our contruct has been terminated during this lock down.
Is it fair?
Is law abinding rules applyed?
In case of any kind of problem you can contact.
No company can deduct salary as well as resign employee during lockdown.
In case of any problem contact
Abhinav Srivastava
Advocate High Court Lucknow Bench
9711983191
i am working in mumbai at a domestic bpo(on behalf  of eurekaforbes) since last 1 year. now due to corona disease , i am in my home . now my TL is saying you just arrange a laptop or pc for work from home otherwise company will pay you only basic salary i.e. approx 3k to 4k  instead of full salary i.e. 11k…if i will not get my full salary it will create a difficulty for me as i am living in mumbai…now what should we do…pls somebody suggest me.
Future group is asking the employees to put APL (all purpose leave) during the lock down days. However, it will be deducted from leave balance..which consequently will not allow us to take leave when we will need later. Later when we will need leave then we will have to put LWP. Instead they can simple regularise as we are present on duty.. i should we pay pur leaves?
Today my management also asked to me for LWP till 15 April 2020.Here  i am also leaving in Bangalore without money how i can survive here even i can not go back to my home due to locked down situation.
please take action as soon as possible!
I am Working in FabHotels Yesterday My Manager asked me to resign as they are not in situation in to continue with me. When I urged a lot they simply leaves a choice in front of me to resign by ensuring that I will receive my full month salary but yesterday they shooted a mail where they mention that every category employees will get less amount of salary till 20%. 
I am not able to understand getting kicked out of job and now getting less deducted salary does really help me. 
Help here if anyone can…
We are a small scale industry in meerut and are not capable enough to pay the labour without them soing any work during lockdown.
If the govt want us to pay them then the government should also redeem us for this loss
My company is deducting 15 days salary and they are forcefully asking people to go on leave wherein they will not pay them. Employees doesn’t want to go on leaves then why are they asking for it. Secondly officially we have more then 35 leaves in a year which we can avail at any point of time.
If my private school terminate me at 31 march then I will be able to take Salary of aprAp month or not due to lockdown.
