It was Rahul’s warning that helped Bhilwara tackle Covid-19, says Sonia at Congress meet
New Delhi: Interim Congress chief Sonia Gandhi Friday said the Rajasthan government’s success in tackling Covid-19 in Bhilwara was the result of a “timely” warning from her son, former party president Rahul Gandhi, sources told ThePrint.
Last month, Bhilwara in Rajasthan, governed by a Congress-led coalition administration under veteran party leader Ashok Gehlot, had emerged as one of the hotspots of the Covid-19 outbreak, registering 27 positive cases and two deaths.
But the strategy adopted by the Rajasthan government and the district administration has ensured that Bhilwara has not registered any new Covid-19 cases in a week, while 13 patients who had tested positive have recovered so far.
Sonia, sources said, made the statement at a meeting with state Congress chiefs, where she reviewed the steps taken by them to tackle the Covid-19 pandemic. The meeting lasted over three hours.
“Sonia Gandhiji mentioned how Rahul Gandhi had, in February itself, warned the government, but no one paid any heed… According to her, had the (central) government taken cognisance of that, we would have been in a better situation today,” said a senior Congress leader who was part of the meeting.
Congress leader Rahul Gandhi had first tweeted about coronavirus on 12 February, saying the government wasn’t taking the threat seriously.  
According to the sources, Sonia also noted how the response of Chhattisgarh, another Congress-governed state under Bhupesh Baghel, to Covid-19 was being praised. Chhattisgarh has reported 10 cases of coronavirus so far, of which nine have reportedly recovered and none has died.  
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“It is because Rahul Gandhi had issued a warning about coronavirus in February itself that states like Rajasthan got into action fast. They ensured there were enough PPE (personal protective equipment) kits,” Sonia was quoted as having said at the video conference. 
“The fact that over 22 lakh people were screened in Bhilwara is phenomenal and this could only be achieved as the state paid heed to Rahul Gandhi’s warning and planned accordingly by putting in place adequate isolation wards, quarantine centres, ventilators, masks, sanitisers etc,” she said. 
“Today, Bhilwara has become a model district that everyone is trying to emulate, this is the kind of work we have to carry on.”
Also Read: This 56-year-old IAS officer is the brain behind Bhilwara model of fighting Covid-19
At the meeting, most state chiefs emphasised the need for more testing, sources told ThePrint. 
“In Uttar Pradesh, according to government data, there are more than 427 cases so far and four deaths have been reported. But it seems the numbers are not correct as more deaths have been reported in the media,” Uttar Pradesh Congress chief Ajay Kumar Lallu told ThePrint.
“The government needs to increase testing. Only 167 tests are being done every day for a state as big as Uttar Pradesh. We told Soniaji that we have provided rations to over 5.5 lakh people and are carrying out all our responsibilities under the guidance of Priyankaji (Congress general secretary and Sonia’s daughter Priyanka Gandhi),” he added.
Delhi Congress chief Anil Chaudhary said Sonia had laid special emphasis on providing safety gear to the frontline health workers who were at the gravest risk of infection.
“All the state chiefs highlighted the fact that testing is not adequate, and the government needs to work on it. At the same time, the relief work that has been announced by the Modi government is not reaching the beneficiaries,” said a second senior leader who didn’t wish to be named.
“It was also suggested that hospitals should be designated for Covid-19 patients. Also, Indians who are stuck outside the country should be given assurances through the embassies that the government is with them. Their well-being should also be taken into consideration.”
Several leaders also alleged that Congress workers were facing difficulties conducting relief work in states where the party wasn’t in office. 
“Soniaji asked all the chiefs to take up the issue with the chief ministers and she will also raise the issue with PM Modi. She asked everyone to carry out the role of a responsible opposition during such testing times,” said a third leader.
Also Read: This is the ‘Bhilwara model’ Modi govt is looking to use across India to fight Covid-19
This is an updated version of the report
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Poor Pappu.
 A true Italian mummy’s boy!
How cute?
it is rahul’s  wisdom maharashtra is suffering from covid today!
Rahul baba got information from ragharam rajan and implemented in maharashtra and made a mess!
as says the very first comment: “Yes Rahul Gandhi had warned on 12th February but centre was busy with the Trump yatra and playing politics in madhya pradesh and now the common man is suffering.”…@Daulat
I appeal to all congress committee members to approach the government with the proposal to recommend Bharat Ratna for Rajkumar Rahul Gandhi. This would extend immense relief to irrelevant Rajmata. She seems to be tired of carrying a burden of two retards for last six years.
Great true
Great true
Great true
But why Rahul Gandhi failed to control Maharashtra? It’s his government in Maharashtra!
Look how we controlled Kerala.
@Daulat seriously bro 😀
May i know how much did papu and his family given donation for COIVD-19 Or still he has only 4000 old Indian Rs and patta huwa kurta….
The correct word, Sir , is Pappu
My daughter objects to your spelling  :-)))
We are eternally grateful to Motilal Nehru, Jawaharlal Nehru, Kamala Nehru, Indira Gandhi, Rajiv Gandhi, Sonia Gandhi, Priyanka Gandhi, Vadra Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi, also Rahul’s dog Piddi Gandhi, that such geniuses and generous kind-hearted people and a dog have saved India again and again. Where would India be without them?
Soniajee, and Rahuljee,
Calculative perfectly is somewhat speculative nature, as claimed in the repor, of the heads of Congress party as we see in their claims. The population mass is a perfect, in the time of this moster crisis, pasture for the grazing spree of the opposition which certainly spare every efforts in its favour.
However, your empathy  words you a genious leader.
No surprise that barkers get so nerve less if the find good of others they don’t want to.  The nation is suffering due to the mismanagement of govt.  What’s the relationship between lockdown and MP government toppling? Or lockdown and end of tabligh conf.?  Who gave permission for tabligh conf in spite of banning any gathering by Kejrial govt?  Why police remained mute spectators during the tabligh? Don’t forget delhi police is under Delhi governor/ home minister. Why Amit saha mute  today?
Madam Sonia and Raul Gandhi…. don’t make fool of Indians….we all know how constructively you are participating in doing good for the country…. and the good day would be when you both leave the politics and be up to yourself… that’s the best could be done to the country…act on it fast
Shall we believe this😠😡
Jay maa gandhari
Then why rest of Rajasthan could not be saved on the basis of Pappu’s instructions…
Very funny….
विनाश काले विपरीत बुद्धि
आगे आगे देखिए, होता है क्या ??
I don’t know much.But I noticed ,Rahul was giving warning about corona much earlier but our Indian Govt. didn’t pay attention to that…they were busy with Delhi riots and Madhya Pradesh that time… sometimes we should pay attention to our juniors also…If our respected govt. would have given proper attention to it some days ago.we could have save our nation from vivid 19.Rahul may not be a clever politician but it doesn’t mean every single word , spoken by him is stupid.
Well said Das, the central government spearheaded by Amit were only interested in creating issues for existing opposition run governments or toppling their governments. They didn’t value or head to anyones advises be it Mamtha or Rahul. Because of their failures, 100s and 1000s of poor people had to be on streets under scorching sun rushing to their villages.  The good governance is not only corruption free but also to be people centric.
Amazing
Great
Oh what a genius ….
Why Rahu l doesn’t helped Itly??? With his wonderful advice. Still itly needs such genious adviser.
Itly wale mama ko suggest karna tha
Why Rahu l doesn’t helped Itly??? With his wonderful advice
Sir please join the congress right away. Bhilwara listened to him but not rajasthan,, punjab and what about maharashtra. Stop fooling people .the central govt started working on it much before rahul baba .Madhaya pradesh is in mess, becoz of cong and kamal nath. GO TO BHILWARA AND FI. D THE TRUTH.
Sir please join the congress right away. Bhilwara listened to him but not rajasthan,, punjab and what about maharashtra. Stop fooling people .the central govt started working on it much before rahul baba .Madhaya pradesh is in mess, becoz of cong and kamal nath. GO TO BHILWARA AND FI. D THE TRUTH.
Another “Me too”. Foxes eat the leftovers of the lions.
I donot know what to say. Sonia madam pl take rest and take care of your health. Live the country to young and India loving people. Atleast now for three months keep distance out of politics.  Support the government keeping mum and silent mouth. Becuase of some Godly nature human beings like Modiji we are truely fighting this situation. The old National Congress already lost now only selfish are there in Congress.
Why Maharashtra ruled by Congress allies leading the chart?
What about Punjab?
Just taking credit not worth discussing this in public
But we can’t deny the fact that Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh are both in Congress statesmanship and as of now doing well against corona.
Bro rajastan sarpanch has slamed sonia Gandhi for taking the credit for their hardwork . You can google it. There is an article in times of india
Why Rahul Gandhi not applies his tactics in Maharashtra
Sir can you believe that is rails idea. But doctor has clarified that it is his idea. Rahul is a greatest lier
Rajasthan & Chhattisgarh have done well because of Rahul? You want people to believe it? What a joke?
Do not undermine the teams of Doctors there & the Govt machinery which got organised there.
Not because of ‘Priya Rahul’.
How is that Sonia is not able to inform  the Italians about Rahul exploits as yet?
Dear print. Well, one is sanguine this may not mean anything to you. But am taking the liberty to say that you  guys really think indians are fools.
God bless you and your idiocity.
Why is it that The shittest people of this unfortunate country are all with surnames ‘Gandhi’ or ‘Nehru’ ?
Is it the same ‘Gandhi’ who fought the British single handed and won freedom for India ?
Really, single handedly? What about the many many freedom fighters who fought for independence? Do you really think British left because of Gandhi? I feel very strongly that britishers planted Gandhi ro fool us indians. Otyerwise lala lajpat rai can be killed for satyagrah but gandhi cant….
Is this a Congress Mouthpiece? I want an answer  before recording my comments
Lol.
Why you are misleading people by writing false information? And also this Bhilwara Model is completely done by Sarpanch Kismat Gurjar
@SarpanchOnline not by “”Pappu””. Its my warning not to write false article in future..
Why Rahul Baba didn’t gave his precious advice to Maharashtra government. Where he’s part of government…
Hi Ma’am
Does Maharashtra govt. Not giving attention to what your son is saying?
Punish them or you owns only 1/3rd responsibility in a coalition govt. So feeling safe?
Lockdown amma ne bade din baad entertainment kiya hai
Pappu ka kuch naya shocking statement dedo
Your paper is not without reason called a presstitute.
Rahul Gandhi is an imbecile and cares two fig for this country or its people.
This family has ripped us for billions and at this crucial hour they have not given 100 INR to help the poor. Shame upon them.
Sarpanch of Bhilwara is already discrediting this news. Hope The Print’s source will take notice of it, eventually.
Why did other congress ruled states not listen to him ??
What you have mentioned in the article that there have been no new cases in bhilwara is not true ..
What sonia gandhi wants to say is that this govt should not do to doctors what the congress had done to the armed forces .. push them into battle without any arms .. madam kitni samajhdar hain ..
These sycophants and blind mother will not stop without finishing Congress.
Why Punjab CM did not heed to Rahul’s warning ? According to Sonia  Covid- 19 can be tackled only by Congress if it is in Power good luck Congress
Badh Me Gaya Gehlot. This is problem with the congress.
Rahul Gandhi was the first to say that Carona is going to hit us as Tsunami. He was right. No harm in accepting  it.
Good joke, sonia just missed the mark by being 10 days late.
Rahul had also said that a Tsunami is coming but nothing happened and he also had to resign from the supid party president’s post.
Anything about Sonia, Rahul and Congress is not worth commenting. Even the family slaves don’t take these two people seriously anymore.
What does the media consider while giving space to people ?
Does anyone think that the Mother-Son  will come back to power?
What an assumption, why they are not speaking on Tablihiq Jamath in Delhi
Thats mother’s love for a son …..
Let people say this  ….ok
Mother hen Sonia praising her son Rahul Gandhi for Covid19 containment is too funny to be taken seriously. But,why has she not sent him to Punjab where situation is bad?
Superb.!!!    Sonia certified that Rahul helped tackle Corona in Bilwara. !!!!!!    Year 2020 biggest joke …still, it is our duty to recomend PM Modi to award Bharat Rathna to Rahul for his “tackling idea” and other services he rendered to our Nation.!!!
It is so nice of Rahul Gandhi giving advice to Bhilwara, but what has he done to his constituency in Kerala, who were the only one who believed in him and voted for him, but now he has gone to advice Bhilwara..  He should have been in Kerala helping people.
Why did he not give any suggestions to the Italian govt. That could have saved lot of lives.
Sonia should have sent Rahul to Italy then.  She can’t stop pampering Pappu and Congress CMs have to guts . She conveniently forgot that Rahul questioned the lockdown itself while he and Priyanka go to meet X during lockdown putting their security people also at risk.
I will be happy if RaGa was involved in this. However, it should be then noted that the PR company of RaGa should be fired as they have not highlighted it until Sonia Ghandi did. None of the media had picked this news earlier about RaGa being active in Biliwara
What were RaGa s contribution in specific to ‘Bhilwara which has become a model district that everyone is trying to emulate’. He claims to have given an early warning ⚠️ Which is a nonsense, when whole world knew the issue he said there same. 
Even the title of this news is misleading to give a colour that RaGa has done something great.
People of India would have been proud if he had said “we are trying to work on a model in Bhiliwara or …….” instead of his famous “I don’t know the solution” which was unsuitable for a leader.
Why Dr. Rahul could not manage one such plan i  othrr parts of India , congree ruled State. Congress lawyer  Sibal said that strict lockdown is like jail. Onviously that should be the thonlong of Pappu. Hence Bhilwara Model have nothing to do with him or his Mummy since they are always against this. Full credit goes to the SDM. Congress rule is – Anything good is our crefit, anthing bad goes to others.
This lady is running the Govt in Maharastra also. She should comment about it also. She can make only false claims
It must be a joke.
Lovely family arrangement. Mother praising son, ignoring the elected government. Now son will praise the mother. This is dynasty rulership, as if no one else has worked.
Lovely family arrangement. Mother praising son, ignoring the elected government. Now son will praise the mother. This is dynasty rulership, as if no one else has worked.
Lol
Why didn’t he warn and guide Punjab, to empower Punjab to handle the situation in a better way…
Why didn’t he warn and guide Punjab?
Your own guys don’t take him seriously! A congress leader from Kerala was caught spreading!
What about other cities of Rajasthan?
In a tense corona situation, the ‘Gandhis’ can be depended upon to give us a good laugh.
Rahul should be nominated for a Nobel prize, if there is any for this category of stealing credits…..Success is a bastard. Has many fathers…while not denying Rahul’s mention of taking this serious in Feb (was he on weeds then ?), the modalities of how Bhilwara was managed should be credited to the DM of Bhilawara. That  too an IAS promotee and not a direct recruit. Shame on this wretched family.
rahul should be recommended for nobel prize as saviour of human lives in rajasthan where congress governs.
Rahul baba had told Trump in 2018 itself that corona is going to strike USA from China and not to make friends with Modi.
Has she requested her secular vote bank to pay heed to his son’s warning or apply some brain and maintain social distancing, we wouldn’t be here at this stage.
