These are the two laws Modi govt has invoked to tackle coronavirus. But it’s not enough
The spread of COVID-19, or the new coronavirus, has kindled a rare, perhaps unprecedented, scare at a global scale resulting in close to 4,300 deaths worldwide. In India, at least 73 people have been affected by COVID-19 so far. The novel coronavirus has challenged public healthcare systems’ capacities to the hilt and the World Health Organization declared it as a pandemic on Wednesday.
Simultaneously, in India, a high level group of ministers reviewed the current status and actions being taken to curb the spread of the virus. They declared that “all states and UTs should  invoke provisions of Section 2 of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, which makes advisories issued by the Ministry of Health Welfare/State/UTs legally enforceable”. Additionally, provisions of the Disaster Management Act, 2005, were invoked to treat this like a disaster.
It is important to unpack these current legal developments and understand the full scope of state action to combat the novel coronavirus.
Also read: India can fight COVID-19, but only if the private sector is allowed to step in quickly
The Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, is the nodal legislation with respect to containment of ‘Dangerous Epidemic Diseases’.
It allows the State Governments and the Central Government to adopt any measures to prevent the outbreak of a dangerous disease once confirmed as an epidemic.
Section 2A of the Act allows the Central Government to take any measures and prescribe regulations for the inspection of any ship or vessel leaving or arriving at any port, or to detain any person arriving or leaving on such a vessel.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Violations of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, invite penalty under Section 188 of the Indian Penal Code.
However, even as the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, gives the Central and State Governments overarching powers, it lacks provisions enabling them to speedily set up management systems required for a coordinated and concerted response. It has also been criticized for being archaic and not up to speed for contemporary health challenges.
Given this, the government has invoked the Disaster Management Act, 2005, since it provides for an exhaustive administrative set up for disaster preparedness. Accordingly, on March 11,  the Union Home Secretary, who is the chairperson of the National Executive Committee under the Act delegated his powers to the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Welfare.
Also read:This is Modi govt’s to-do list for ministries to tackle coronavirus crisis efficiently
