3 days left for NEET admit cards, no decision on postponement of exam yet 
New Delhi: With various state governments strictly enforcing lockdown to prevent the spread of COVID-19, board exams and entrance exam schedules have taken a hit. While the central government has already announced that the Joint Entrance Exam (JEE), which was slated for April, will be postponed, there is no decision on National Eligibility Entrance Test (NEET) as of now.
The NEET is to take place on 3 May and as of 24 March, the schedule has not been changed. The National Testing Agency (NTA), which is the nodal agency for conducting these exams, is supposed to release admit cards on its official website by 27 March.
Vineet Joshi, chairman, NTA, said there is no decision on postponing the exam as of now and the agency is monitoring the situation. “We are constantly monitoring the situation and coordinating with all other agencies,” he told ThePrint.
According to official NTA data, 15.93 lakh students have registered for NEET this year. The examination is for medical colleges in the country and its results will be declared in June.
Sources in the Ministry of Human Resources Development said the government is monitoring the situation closely and will take a call on all academic activities such as school sessions and exam dates after 31 March.
“The situation is being closely monitored by states and central government and a decision will be taken post 31 March after reviewing the effect of restrictions,” said a senior ministry official, who did not wish to be named.
“Whether it is about the academic session, or school summer vacations, all such points are being discussed within the ministry but a decision will be taken in coordination with all the stakeholders involved.”
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
For JEE, another NTA official said the agency will try to make sure that the dates of the entrance exam do not coincide with the CBSE board exams, since both have been postponed.
“We are working along with CBSE and will try to make sure that the JEE dates do not coincide with any of the board exams, because a lot of students would be appearing for both,” said the NTA official.
Nearly nine lakh students will appear for the JEE this year, which is a gateway for admission to all engineering colleges in India. Once candidates clear JEE-Mains, they qualify for JEE-Advanced, which is for admission to the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs).
Also read: If India has to control coronavirus pandemic, it must contain 4 other contagions as well


Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
plzz make a right decision soon students are facing problems bcoz the gov. is not announcing any decision on entrance exam. It is important to take right decision as soon as possible.
Neet admit card
Please dont postpone neet
plz postponed neet 2020
Please kindly postponed NEET exam due to Corona virus affected disappointed studying system in our local .
Please kindly postponed NEET2020 due to COVID19 affected disappointed studying system in our local .
R/NEET Authority
          Hi am TEJAS. There were many problems were created in our study because of corona virus and shutdown of india also affect on our study. So plz postponed our NEET 3 MAY 2020 EXAM.
plz sir we are requesting you that plz postpone the neet exam date plz sir….now we are facing a lot of problam by virous plz postpone thr neet exame sir plz sir…..
Plz plz sir,  I request u to postpone our neet exam sir we r not yet ready due to corona virus and all courses has been stopped. Plz plz sir
Sir,
My D. ROHITH
     I request to postpone this NEET because most of the students had not prepared well due to this corona effect and we have come for the purpose of holidays and we are restricted to not go on to roads, so we left our books at hostel so there no material to us to read so please look at this and try to post pone this neet
Please do not take risk on Indian future doctors . Request for NTA please postpone NEET
There is a heavy information overload concerning the harassing virus. The impact of the inevitable preoccupation with encountering resourcefully our common invisible foe interferes with the ordinary business of day-to-day living and more significantly the learning task. Attention, retention and remembering are taxing. There may be time available, but severe stress,  anxiety, and fear and uncertainty as well as existential anxiety do not bode well for an ideal learning environment for competitive exams. Postponement will generate a sense of relief and some kind of locus of control.
This is a time to take wise desicion. It’s a fact that Academics will be effected. All world is suffering from the Pandemic. Even we are taking atmost care, still the Virus is spreading.” Stay at Home” is the slogan now. Conducting an exam and gathering of students of lakhs…think of s situation If anyone was infected, and how it easily spread to all others. We are watching the situation in Italy. Utter carelessness was resulted in 18K deaths. Let not that happen in our country. Plz do realize the situation. If such a social spreading occurs in India, No one could do any thing to stop it. So please be wise and think what is valuable is an Year or lives of Million population, and a future.
Kashmiri students have been doing home studies for last one year with communication blockade while as students in rest of the country are enjoying net facility which helps them in their smart studies. So these NEET aspirants can easily prepare at home during the lockdown period. NEET exam should be conducted as per schedule.
Sir in our state board exams were not yet completed we even dint know when it will be so please postpone the neet exams atleast 30 days so as i have to concentrate on neet
Please do not postponed the neet exam plzzzzzzzzzzzz
Please make a wise decision regarding Neet exam. Consider about the cbse boards and also the damage in studies caused due corona virus fear.
Hello
Whatever the situation may be  and by taking the kashmiris as role model we also have to prepare for NEET the way they are doing since years, lets face it and get unwrapped… i request the government and NTA to conduct it as per schedule..
Plzz sir all the students requesting you
Please NTA postpone the examination
Plz postpone neet exam due to crucial condition we cannot go for coaching class to get sufficient information so the time consumption will be more to make understand on ourselves we think our request will reach you
Please postpone the neet exam 2020
Plzzz postponed Neet examination
We didn’t study well due to corona virus stress
Respected NEET Authority ,
    Plz postponed the 3may 2020 , NEET.
Hello am samra, Even though after self completion of syllabus, it’s already hectic task to revise d whole thing again with  mock tests at final revision, above which we hv 100 thoughts running back of mind abt rapid spread of covid-19.. i know its our duty to be prepared by hook or by crook till d scheduled date, but due to dis epidemic situation I request NTA Team to atleast postpone it.. & if not All other decisions are totally acceptable cuz we r aspirants we need to accept it.. but hope NTA  takes a right decision with regards to health of 15.93 lakh students with der parents/guardians..rather risking der future by huge gathering which is enough for levelling d virus up to higher stage.!
AS coronavirus spreading in very geometric Manor So we r not in touch of our faculties now we are not able to take classes so sir please respond the date it’s my humble request
Sir plzzz  try to understand our condition….we are getting so much problem regarding our coaching…..save our 2 year and plzzz postpone the NEET upto june…..it will be really helpful
Please postponed the NEET because we all students facing various problems so please postponed it please
Plzz postponed the neet because we all students facing various problems so please postponed it please
please NTA postpone the NEET 2020 EXAM as it will be very problematic and dangerous for the students of 16laks number to gather together for thee exam.
Even after these 21 days precautions should be taken by the people to avoid coming out ogmf home . 
It is a humble request by every NEET ASPIRANT to postpone NEET 2020 which is going to be held on May 3 .
NTA IT IS  HUMBLE REQUEST FROM EACH AND EVERY NEET 2020 ASPIRANT THAT THE EXAM SHOULD BE POSTPONED DUE TO THE OUTBREAK OF DEADLY CORONA VIRUS .
STUDENTS ARE UNABLE TO CONCENTRATE AND MOREOVER ALL THE COACHING INSTITUTES ARE CLOSED WHICH HELP THE STUDENTS TO COMPLETE THEIR SYLLABUS AND MAKE THEM READY FOR EXAMINATION.
AS THIS DISEASE SPREADS BY SOCIAL CONTACT SO IT WOULD BE  VERY RISKY FOR THE INDIA’S TEENAGERS AS THEY MAKE INDIA’S FUTURE. IT WOULD NOT BE A GOOD IDEA BY NTA TO ALLOW THE GATHERING OF 16 LAKH STUDENTS AT THE SAME TIME.
IT IS REALLY A SERIOUS MATTER .
I REQUEST THE NATIONAL TEST AGENCY TO KINDLY POSTPONE NEET 2020 EXAM FOR THE SAKE OF INDIA’S FUTURE.
Please save our 1 year repeat because due to this we can’t study well, all time there is stress… Please, exam date must be in june ….😵😵😵😷😷😷
Yaaa…pls schedule it on time
Right bro
Plz postpone neet exam upto june
Pl postponed neet exam 2020
Neet should be postponed
Our studies are getting affected!
Plzzzz it’s a humble request
Plzz take the decision as soon as possible!
Sir please do not postpone the NEET examination…
Apne ni bhai sab ke bare me soch tum Topper h sb nii haar kisi ka soch kr koi chiz bola kro
Yes Plzzz
Sir please postponed the neet exam because of lockdown students are facing lots of problem regarding studies and much more things sir we all request you for this
With the situation at hand, the situation developing, lessons from China, Italy, South Korea, it is obvious that NEET should be postponed until the first week of JULY. It is crucial, vital, essential and absolutely necessary. Anything else would most probably result in grave consequences, for all parties involved.
I’m already a dropper. I wanna get over with neet. But I’m not able to concentrate due to current situation. I hope that right decision is taken
Plz post phone the neet exam
Till the danger of corana
Plzz… My humble request to NTA chairman & our central government.. Plz postpone neet 2020 .. As we are facing lot of problems… Plzzzzzzzzz…..its Better to organize exam in the month of June… So that we can write our exams stress free… Plzz govt… Here our words. .. Why are you not taking a fast decision… Plzz….
NEET 2020 should be postponed
due to unconvince of neet coaching classes regarding lock down we are unable to get the coaching. So it’s better to postpone. Plz understand our problem
Sir plz neet exam postponed , we can’t concentrate to our study.
Plz sir request
Please postpone meet examination
respected sir /madam,
I am a neet aspirant. I study in Kota. I had come to home to  celebrate holi with my family & I am stuck here in a miserable condition because all of my books & notes are there in hostel. Also the environment at home is not suitable to concentrate. I was ought to cancel my train ticket for the 3rd time due to my family request. I am very depressed.
PLEASE POSTPONE NEET for atleast 21 days.
Sir jeeeeeee.
Assalamualaikum
Namaste
Satsriakal
I am Malik nargis  from kashmir 
Now  u realize  the situation of being  locked up.
We kashmir students r facing the same thing  from years.
U are realizing  now how to prepare  for neet without  any tuition.
Ooo jinab they are just watching like bull but didn’t take any decision,,,so I request as a kashmiri just go and concentrate on your studies don’t waste time here and there to listen about this neet exam ,may God bless u and inshaallah u will be future doctor of kashmir but provided condition u work hard than last month’s, although I also surfing the neet website 1o times a day but it’s not good ,,it’s just consumes our precious time… Allah Hafiz
Silly excuse sweetie …
You should think from the point of being an indian.  Think of others plz…. Socha kro dusro ka .neet should be post poned
Pls postpone neet NTA😭😭😭
Pls Postpone the exam as there is a lockdown till 14 April and we cant Leave our house and also the classses are closed .. th MHT-CET exam is also postpened and it will be reschduled 2on 30 april … if they conducted the exam in 1st weak of may then it will be dificalt ot study
CET and NEET Symultaniously
My books are at the hostel,due to present scenario I can’t get it,the district borders are closed too.
I am in a miserable condition please postpone NEET 2020
Sir please postpone neet 2020 exam due to present situation.we can’t concentrate to our study.please postpone neet 2020 exam
No neet only think about Corona.
As the covid19 is spreading in geometric manner,we are isolated from our faculties.This is humble request to NTA plz.. postpone the neet exam.
Pls postpond exam
sar NAT ka paper postponed kr di jeye
Plz postpone this exam to June …
NEET exam should b postponed because the aspirants who where interested in crash Course didn’t completed there syllabus yet.HRD ministry must concern on it.
Hello, I am Diplim pathak from Assam.
A neet aspirant indeed. The lockdown and mental pressure is making it almost impossible to concentrate and study and give our best.
There is constant panic about covid 19 in my head too.
Hope NTA will take the right decision (i really hope it will be postponed)
Yet whatever the descision is please inform us quickly. This dilemma is very depressing.
I just don’t understand why NTA is doing this with us? We are requesting….. No we are begging to postpone Neet 2020. It has been really difficult for us. I’ll talk about myself I am from MP and my coaching is closed from 14th March and I am not been able to attend classes since then. We had to complete our chemistry syllabus which is incomplete now too. We were to have revision classes which we now can’t attend till 15th April. We had to practise practise paper which we can’t….. Please please I beg you to please postpone neet 2020
Neet 2020 should be post poned by at least 21 days.
I am a student in Jaipur, was about to depart for Lucknow on 23 march.
But due to sudden lockdown in here, and further in the whole nation, I am stuck here in the city. The problem being, I have much of my study material there in Lucknow at my relative’s home.
Becoming a doctor is my biggest dream. I am facing the worst situation of my life ever, I feel so helpless.
Also a friend of mine who is a dropper was waiting for a whole 1 year for a 50 day crash course before NEET and was confident to
carck the exam after his 1 year preparation, the course and all his doubt discussions with teachers, but now all in vain. He is so depressed.
I hope the government will be sensible enough to understand the whole different kinds of problems which almost all the students are facing right now.
The toppers may not face much difficulty but the majority are the mediocres  who are for sure feeling stucked.
#staysafestayhome
#covid19
#jaihind
sir we are suffering a lot….we need few time for the preparation…..I request you to postponed the date……!!!
Please postpone the neet 2020
Please ……..
Since, the Neet is National exam. All the people all over the India whether they are rich or poor should get equal opportunity. but What about people in the slum area in mumbai they don’t even have the proper house attached with Toilet. How can they isolate themselves. Afraid of corona virus in their daily lives. How will they concentrate on their studies…………
Plz postpone Neet examination since we are not being able to prepare for it since all the courses have  been shutdown  till 15th april 2020. Plz understand our situation, plz postpone the examination s plz…..
Don’t postponed neet jaldise paper haat mein pakdado aur kitna intajar karoge!
Abeyyy postpone kar lona. Iss saal ka pura cancel kardo. Bacche pareshan hai. Aap logo ko Kya problem ho rahi hai? Samajhte nahi ho kya raees gharo ke aulaad? Ghar ka ration nahi mil raha aur padhai kaise kare apun log? Ooo bhai maro mujjhe maro.  #Sab yaad rakha jayega, sab kuch yaad rakha jayega. Writing the exam would be disrespectful to the souls of the departed. Coaching centre jaane ka ab 1 mahina hone ko aaya hai. Tum log samajhte kyo nahi ? Apun ko gussa bahut aayela hai. Please ffs postpone kardo.
Dont postponed neet exam please……
Why
I request you all nta team.. Pls postpone neet 2020 exam.. We r too much dissapointed yet this covid-19 pls sir… Postpone exam right now due to corona virus… Our study is not good yet..this is not only my problem… Many students are suffering a lot from this prblm.. I request u all pls postpone exam
Yes may defer by at least 15 days.
Sir pls postpone neet exam sir due to covid-19 we cannot preparing,we are at home
Please please postpone NEET exam
Sir, plzz postpond the neet exam becoz our coaching syllabus is not completed. We are totally depends on our teachers and because of lockdown  we are not connecting with our teachers. Because of this situation we are so depressed.
Avinash Kumar sonkar  sir I request that many problem creat due to covid 19 and lock down many students neet preparation effected so I request that postponed neet 2020 kindly
Please postpone neet exam
Sir please postpone NEET 2020
Sir
I am also a Neet student
It is humble request to nta please postpone the exam as corona is agreat threat to human life so please extend the exam date
Considering the present lockdown until mid April 2020 and a situation may arise for the government to take a call post mid April 2020 as well to extend the lock down considering the pandemic situation, it is highly appreciable if NTA comes up with some clarity if possible today to address the anxiety of the aspiring students who are preparing for  NEET  almost more than 2 years.  Please provide them clarity asap.
Please postponed neet 2020…..this situation effects our study…..we are helpless this time…,it should be postponed
Hi HRD Minister,
Please keep children health first by postponing the NEET 2020. Don’t play politics on innocent young students who are future to Bharat and make appropriate statement of moving   Soon than Later From May 3rd to July.
Irresponsible politicians always ruins the future generations.
Ssss plz postpone need exams better it will be safe to students cmg to examination centre according to NTA it’s correct not to postpone but we need understand the covid-19 around world .if we conduct the exam at same day plz take hygiene measures to the students .
On this exam depends the entire future of a person..But given the outbreak of corona outbreak a number of factors are counted in. I am the only one in my house eligible to do the last moment chores. My both parents are sick and due to lockdown we cant get any help as the helpers have gone to their village.. like mine there are many unique situations putting the future of an student at stake at the 11th hour.
One of my friend who is also preparing has no parents and he has to take care of many things in these extraordinary circumstances.
It is no small exam. Some of us have their 4th or 5th attempt..
Please think judicially and postpone the exam. This situation is unprecedented one. No one was prepared for it..Neither are the students..last minute rush to houses..and a lot many deterrents..
Postpone the exam.Let justice prevail
Plz postponed the exam
Respected board ,
          Please postpone neet 2020 for a while as covid 19 being pandemic.Please give  us a  few more time to get rid of this havoc and get prepared well.Many of us were eagerly preparing for the test for the entire last academic year,but in such a situation we are not in a mindset to face such an important test of our life.I  beg   you officials to postpone the exam by considering our valuable future.It will be very helpful if you good people understand our feelings and take necessary decisions  .Hope nta will  do it for the neet aspirants.please ..please..pleasee
Plz postpone the neet exam becoz coaching institutes are shut due to covid-19 and our course is still left..
Make sure 15 April is due date of lockdown, after that board exam will be held,if possible which neet will go in last June or July
Sir neet. 2020 should be postponed because we haven’t completed some chps by our institute
Nd this epidemic disturbed d whole schedule
Test series all hv been stopped
It might gives depression
Plz postponed it for further month plz
Neet should be postponed… NTA should try to understand the situation
Plz postponed neet xm…we are totaly isolated from teachers our course is not complete yet ….so plz
Sir please postponed neet exam
😁😁😁😁😁
Yes
Sir please postponed the neet exam
It’s my humble request to nta and ministry of health pls postpone the neet exam which
Is to be held on 3 may 2020..
Due the present scenario……
Sir kindlt requesting plzz postpone  the neet eaxm. Becausae  all the students  are at home.. They don get prepared  well.. Due to pandemic  corona virus.. Plzz ra kindly requesting you… Sir plzzz
Banda na neet postpone 2020 to 2021 maghia
Bala neet ghunchiba mane ghunchiba
Sir plz postpone the neet exam from 2020 to 2021 and plz return my 1500/- with 100 rupee for processing fee. All students are pray to the God, vineet joshi rip by corona
1 min silence for vineet joshi
As per the pm decided  to assure 15 April is due date of lockdown, after that board exam will be held,if possible which neet will go in last week June or July
Sir plz postpone the neet exam from 2020 to 2021 and plz return my 1500/- with 100 rupee for processing fee. All students are pray to the God, vineet joshi rip by corona
Haaaaahaaaaaaa
Kindly postpone neet exam, because of pandemic we are unable to concentrate. We are quiet worried about disease and are unable to appear in coaching final test series.
Respected authority as per the situation is going on its my request to you to postpond it as the coaching institutes and everything has been lockdown and a situation pandemic and breathtaking is around its better to give a break upon it and avoid any kind of social gathering whether for any purpose it is , and last but not the least as one of my brother mentioned above about condition of Kashmir yes , we know but we can never feel it I hope a day comes when u  here gets the same requirements as we do , and you said it to be conducted – 1 . there is a situation of panic so I don’t think that a student could give his/her full conc. in the exam properly .
2. The most concern right know is our safety and health we know its contagious so we should avoid public gathering and be at our home as much as we can its not about anyone but its actually about you so stay safe stay bless and thank god you are safe and pray for those who became a victim of it .
Sir we are
IN ORDER TO STOP THE WIDESPREAD OF COVID-19 .
THE AGENCY SHOULD LOOK UPON IT AND TAKE NECESSARY MEASURES
WE THE STUDENTS ARE READY TO FACE THE SITUATION , ANY CHANGE OR DECISION WILL BE ACCEPTABLE
JUST LOOKING FORWARD TO THE DECISION IN FAVOUR TO SAVE OURSELVES FROM THIS DANGER
#STAY SAFE
15.93 STUDENTS APPLIED FOR THE EXAMINATION THIS IS ENOUGH TO CREATE A HUGE CROUD ALL OVER THE COUNTRY , THE MOB WILL ALSO INCLUDE THIER PARENTS OR GUARDIANS JOINING THEM AT LEAST TILL THE EXAMINATION CENTERS . THIS COULD MAKE A SITUATION OF GREAT WORRY .
THIS IS A HUMBLE REQUEST TO THE NTA THAT NEET SHOULD BE POSTPONED FOR THE WELL BIENG OF ALL OF US
              THANK YOU
-ATHARVA WAROKAR
AKOLA , MAHARASHTRA 444001
DATE :- 24/03/2020
#BE SAFE #BE CALM
Sir we are students form rular areas suffer from lots of depression due to carona
We not give much concentration on Neet so pilzzzzz post pond neet
Neet should be postponed.
We the aspirants  are very depressed. Due to covid19 havoc.
Plz postponed the exam which is held on 3 may 2020 bcoz our coaching centres are closed till 15 april because of lockdown…
Pls think about all the students over the country ….. Some cities are facing critical situation .. and having heavy dangerous condition..  pls postpone neet 2020… Think of that students..
Plz postponed the exam which is held on 3 may 2020 bcoz our coaching centres are closed till 15 april because of lockdown…
Nta please postpone neet because many students depend on 45days academic crash course because off they are not able to join one year academic course and also students depends on test series…Still many student facing this situation that’s why nta may take a right decision such type off situation…And also health is imp than exam….
Neet 2020 need to POSTPONED  because how can we prepare for neet 2020 our  hostel institute and coaching centres are closed till 15 April 202p And we have no sufficient  time for preparing neet exam so we request to NTA plz postponed the exam which is held on 3 may 2020
Plzz postponed neet 2020.. We r not able to get any coaching right now in this situation………….
Yes the NEET exam should be postponed…..As 15.93 lakh students will give neet exam,as students will come from different parts of India which are affected from corona virus and they will  affect other students  when they will come in contact and then the case of Corona virus will raise  very high..so it will be better to postpone the exam……As it is very  serious problem worldwide……..
Yes the NEET exam should be postponed…..As given 15.93 lakh students are appearing  for the neet exam which is conducted by NTA …..as students will come from different parts of India which are affected from corona virus and they will  affect other students  when they will come in contact….so it will be better to postpone the exam……As it is very  serious problem worldwide……..
Sir please postponed the exam  we are unable to prepare well and the virus is spreading too fast so please sir postponed the exam
It’s a double whammy. As per SC order, NEET admissions are to be completed by 31st August. In the past, there were many instances, wherein the hon’ble court did not budge from its decision. It’s better to have NEET on 3rd May. Rest are procedural matters. Self study is best way to score good Mark’s, please do not be dependent on the coaching institutes. Moreover,  they are providing online classes.
Hi  sir …, this is sona vijayakumar from kerala… , the  neet exam held on 03 may 2020  will be postpone or not….?  I request to nta team ,  please inform us quickly…
Pls postpone neet 2020
It’s our future …..
It’s our request … For nta and govt..
Neet exam could be postponed only if the situation demand nit on the plea of preparation requirement because everybody is in the sane situation.
U r right
Meet exminatioa date
Due to curfew we are facing lots of problem nd we can’t concentrate our studies plz postponed neet exam
Respected sir,
 Iam sonali bawra  Bsc f.y student  my exm  date sheet will supposed to clxx with neet exm Please postpone neet exam   sir 🙏
Neet 2020 need to postponed because the epidemic has arrived and we ,the aspirant very  disturbed…..
Punjab situation is so critical …NTA should postpone neet 2020 ..Because apedemic has arrived.. whole mindset move toward familyissue and precaution…
Yes we request for NTA that they should  postponed NEET according  to the present situation..
Sir please postpond it as everyone is facing lots of problem nd many candidates family is suffering from Corona virus so please pospnd the date sir
Sir meet eaxm is postponed yet or not plzz fastly reply
No
Hii , this is Sonali Singh from Bihar muz. I want to request the nta team please cancel the neet 2020 exam which is conducted on 3 may 2020  because their are many students which are appearing in neet 2020 who they are belongs from Maharastra , Kashmir , Delhi , and other states which are affected by coronavirus , how can we prepare for neet 2020 our school college hostel institute every coaching centre are closed till 15 April and we have no much time for preparing neet 2020 air with have due request plggg help us we are in trouble we can’t concentrate on our studies and this is not only my problems their are lots of students which are suffer from this , I hope you can understand our situation , don’t wait for situation
Yes there are soo many students who are suffering from this , plz plz plzzz postpone
Yes
