Prasar Bharati likely to telecast Ramayan and Mahabharat after ‘public demand’
New Delhi: Responding to people’s demand for a re-telecast of Mahabharat and Ramayan during the nationwide lockdown, Prasar Bharati CEO Shashi Shekhar Wednesday said the public service broadcaster was “working” with “rights holders” to air the mythological series on Doordarshan.
Shekhar’s tweet came in response to the request made by Akhilesh Sharma, political editor and anchor of NDTV India.
Yes we are working on the same with the Rights Holders. Will update shortly. Stay tuned. https://t.co/2Jhjw2qD3s
— Shashi Shekhar (@shashidigital) March 25, 2020

ThePrint tried to contact Shekhar through calls and messages but failed to receive any response till the time this copy was published.
A senior Prasar Bharati official, who did not wish to be identified, told ThePrint that concrete details on airing the two series will only be finalised after formalities are completed.
With the majority of citizens being forced to stay indoors, in order to avoid transmission of coronavirus, many Twitter users have written how the Ramayan and Mahabharat had earlier “acted as magnets that quarantined people” and that it still can.
Dear @narendramodi ji @PrakashJavdekar ji
Please consider asking DD, and advising other channels, to telecast Ramanand Sagar's Ramayana and B R Chopra's Mahabharata daily. Perhaps two episodes a day each.
They acted as magnets in quarantining people back then. They still can.
— Pranasutra (@pranasutra) March 24, 2020

We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Some even said the two mythological series will also help reduce stress.
@PMOIndia @narendramodi @PrakashJavdekar @rsprasad Pl consider broadcast of Ramayan and Mahabharat on DD National! Will help reduce stress! https://t.co/Lv2FiIIAFx
— Mohandas Pai (@TVMohandasPai) March 25, 2020

Just like SAB shows TMKUC back-to-back episodes, DD should telecast back-to-back episodes of Ramayana and Mahabharata for next 21 days.
— Self free, outside quarantined (@gouripathy) March 25, 2020

Users particularly demanded the re-telecast of film director Ramanand Sagar’s Ramayan that was first aired in 1987 on Doordarshan.
The series was based on the Hindu epic Ramayana written by Valmiki around 300 BCE. This epic poem was first composed in Sanskrit and documents Hindu deity Rama’s journey.
People also demanded the telecast of film director B.R. Chopra’s Mahabharat which was first aired in 1988 on Doordarshan. Mahabharat, based on Sage Vyasa’s epic, narrates the struggle for “sovereignty” between two groups of cousins, the Kauravas and Pandavas.
(With inputs from Amrita Nayak Dutta)
Also read: Video gamers have the last laugh as e-sports industry booms during Covid-19 lockdown
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Respected sir,
Can you re-telecast other three famous serials -HINDUSTANI, RAJA-RANCHO, YUG.
Please sir, it is a humble request. I hope you have an eye on this matter.
THANKING YOU
PREETI
Please start chandrakanta serial please
Plz repeat todays morning episode of Ramayan..
Please repeat Ramayan episode at night as womens are not able to see it in the morning due to morning buzy schdule
Hi
आज महाभारत डीडी भारती चैनल पर देखी तो मन प्रसन्न हो गया। Very good for Indian culture.
Thank you for re-telecast of epic show Ramayana. Loved watching it again. Please start buniyad also in prime time slot.
Heavens! The Ramayana is  not ‘a Hindu’ Epic as described,it’s a true blue Indian epic. The authors /writers  are  extremely narrow minded in their thinking. It’s like explaining Homer’s Iliad to be  a Christian epic.These epics are nothing but Chronicles and Ballads of heroes of the past ,penned by exceptionally talented poets How does Religion come into this? And then we blame others of being communal!
DD national  on air mahabhart  please
DD national  on air mahabhart  please not dd bharti
Aaj Ramayan ka first episode dekha man khush ho gya .bachpan ki yaden taja ho gyi .mere bachcho ne bhi yah dekha .dhanywad for se dikha k liye .please BR Chopra ki mahabharat bhi re telecast ki jay
Time And Channel Dso
Please the editor of the dd free dish  please  add  the entertainment channel and flim channel in dd free dish.
Jai shree ram
I feel it’s great, if the epics are retelecast. Children will know our culture and elders will recall our great old culture and heritage leisurely. Eagerly awaiting.
Plz also start sadda haq serial again… As repeat telecast on channel v or any other channel as per your convenience.
अच्छी खबर सभी खुश हैं।जल्दी प्रसारण कीजिए
Malgudi Days
I am waiting for telecast Ramayana and mahabharata.lam waiting for time day for date
जय, श्री राम
Great news, I was already looking for episodes of Mahabharat
यह कब से प्रसारित किया जाएगा ।समय  जल्द ही बताए सभी को बड़ी उत्सुकता है पुनः देखने की
Shaktimaan ka bhi prasaran ho
Great news do it early
I am eagerly awaiting the telecast.
The telecast should start early so that it will be completed during the lockdown period.
Very nice
Oh wow,
Very good news, Now will able to see again The Ramayana and The Mahabharata again.
When it starts?  early  recast this….
Comment  date  plz..
When it starts?  early  recast this….
Comment  date  plz..
Welcome jay sri ram
Brilliant idea if started immediately during the lockdown period. Younger generation will have an opportunity to watch these great series.
Great idea if it is started immediately during lockdown period. Younger generation will have an opportunity to watch these great series
Great idea if it is started immediately during lockdown period. Younger generation will have an opportunity to watch these great series
Respected Sir /Madam, Our request to please start Ramayan /Mahabharat during this Boring time staying at Indoots.
Also request to telecast “Mungeri Lal ke hassin kahaniya.
Only yesterday we all family members were talking about same issue & today we come  to know this good news. All of we are waiting for telecast of two all time hit serials
Yes, Ramayan and Mahabharat should be telecasted during the lockdown period. This would be a great time pass with knowledge of our epics. We are waiting for early telecast.
Sir please start a unbelievable show ramayana, mahabharata and shaktiman please show in DD national I request
ॐ [जय श्री राम] 卐
Request to retelecast Ramayan and mahabharata again
The only base of life is Krishna which we can proved through the leelas of the supreme lord in form of Ramayan and Mahabharat.
Modi-Shah’s BJP has nothing for future to offer to its voters. So it desperately keeps recycling outdated entertainment so people will forget their misery that has been on an increase under  this Modi-Shah regime.
You will never  change
You see everything in political angle
You better admit to some mental hospital to get treatment
Or else leave India
Please tell when n which time it will be telecast.
I have seen this seiral already when I was 16 years old but I want to see again with my family . I think my children will also something learn from it please it on DD national.
Please Re telicast chandrakanta serial
Very brilliant idea to keep people indoor during 21 days Janta Curfew.
Plus the epics will provide an opportunity for people to emulate India’s rich ideals and values through the highly entertaining and enlightening episodes of two classic epics
I wish to watch Neem Ka Per, Godan, discovery of India.
Good.both were the most viewed serial of that time. Waiting eagerly for the comback
Please telecast Ramanand  Sagar’s Ramayan during this lock down period & B.R.Chopras Mahabharata on D D National channel.
Ian’s my family  too would like to see both the serials of Ramayana and Mahabharata
Really it’s wonderful and right time to retelecast o  the great Epics Ramayan and Mahabharat that relieves stress of  all of us.
Please; start transmissionof  these programmes as well as  serial “Yug”.Our up bringing generation must know about this.
Shaktimaan,  mogli( jangal jangal baat chali hai), Vikram betaal, Capton Vyom Kesh Bakshi, Chandrakanta, Tahkikat…
please show ramyan and apply analog trassmission
We are eagerly waiting ,please telecast as early as possible
Eagerly awaiting for Ramayan and Mahabharat in this lock down
Request u to again retelecast Ramayana & Mahabharata.
Very nice idea please do telecast both the serials continuously so that people may not wander here and there , Jay Ram ji ki
Please tell the timing
जय श्री राम
शुभ कार्य मैं देरी क्यों भगवान
आज सभी के परिवार घर पर बैठे है सब परिवार के साथ देख पाएंगे  बच्चों को भी कुछआदर्श सीखने को मिलेगा
लोग बाहर भी नही घूमेंगे । आप से प्राथर्ना है कि आप इसे पुनः प्रसारित करा देवे । जिससे भारत की संस्कृति का अनुभव भी मिलेगा ।
जय श्री राम । *प्रभु राम अवश्य सुनेगें*
Yes, this is the right time for telecasting the two serials “Ramayan” & ” Mahabharat”to keep the people’s in home.
