Move aside Giloy & cow urine, Indian businesses have now found ‘anti-coronavirus’ mattresses
New Delhi: With the COVID-19 outbreak creating panic across the globe, some businesses seem to have found an easy opportunity to try and sell products they claim can fight the pandemic, the latest being an ‘anti-coronavirus’ mattress.
A manufacturing firm named ‘Arihant’, which recently advertised this product, has priced its mattresses at Rs 15,000. The tagline says: “An India which sleeps on anti-coronavirus mattress will move forward”.
For the first time we have left China behind in Research and Development…#CoronaOutbreak #COVID19india pic.twitter.com/BE7Ivennl4
— Berlin (@vipin122821) March 14, 2020

When contacted by ThePrint, the firm’s owner attempted to explain the concept.
“Nothing can go inside the mattress. It is anti-fungal and anti-allergic, dust mite proof and water proof. We have been producing this product for ages,” the firm’s owner Amar Parekh told ThePrint.
Many Indian entrepreneurs have been trying to sell items that would battle the deadly virus, irrespective of whether these are scientifically proven to do so or not. Some small-scale businesses have also been advertising their ‘virus-resistant products’.
The spread of the virus has seen many claim to come up with possible cures too. While Ramdev had suggested giloy, Assam BJP MLA Suman Haripriya has advocated drinking cow urine to counter the disease.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The effort by firms to cash in on the coronavirus panic comes at a time when India has registered 83 positive cases and two deaths.
So far, people infected with the virus have been those with a travel history to affected places, their immediate family members or neighbours who had come in contact with them.
But there are fears that India could be moving towards community transmission. Many states, including Kerala, Karnataka, Delhi and Maharashtra have announced a virtual lock down — shutting down schools, educational institutions and other places of public gathering like movie halls.
India has also suspended all visas, except for diplomatic, official, UN/international organisations, employment and project visas, till 15 April. The government has urged citizens to avoid unnecessary travel and has prescribed a mandatory quarantine of 14 days for inbound travellers in a bid to arrest the spread.
The virus has so far killed over 4,000 and 118,000 people globally. It has spread to six continents and 114 countries.
