Asaram Bapu’s bail plea denied, Gujarat HC says thousands will come to meet him if he’s out
New Delhi: The Gujarat High Court Wednesday denied temporary bail to Asumal Harpalani alias Asaram Bapu, who had sought the release on the grounds that he was 84 years old and susceptible to contracting Covid-19 in jail.   
Lodged in a prison in Jodhpur, Rajasthan, Asaram was convicted in a case of sexual assault on a minor. He is also facing trial in a rape case in Gandhinagar court and so had approached the court seeking temporary bail for four months on various grounds.  
In denying Asaram bail, Justice A.S. Supehia observed, “The applicant in the present application has made a specific averment that he has a number of followers all over the world and in India. Considering the said averment, it would not be apposite to release the applicant on bail in light of the prevailing situation of Covid 2019, since there is a strong possibility that on release of the applicant, his thousands of followers will congregate to meet him, which will aggravate the distressing situation.” 
Asaram’s lawyers referred to news reports claiming that there were high chances of him getting infected in Rajasthan’s jails. They had pointed out that he has been in judicial custody for several years now and that he is suffering from various diseases as well.  
“Learned advocate for the applicant has further submitted that the applicant is 84 years of age and as per her information in the Jodhpur Jail, some of the prisoners are affected with coronavirus and hence, there is every likelihood that the applicant may also get affected by this virus,” the court order noted.  
Also read: Bail pleas, paperwork, case files — ED and CBI have not been shut down by lockdown
The government lawyer, however, pointed out that Asaram had approached the court citing the same reasons in March.  
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The court had rejected his earlier application on 30 March, noting that he was involved in “very serious offences” and that his case did not fall in the guidelines issued by the High Powered Committee constituted to look into temporary release of certain category of prisoners due to Covid-19.  
While this committee has recommended the release of those undertrial prisoners who have been accused of offences punishable with imprisonment up to seven years, Asaram is facing charges with maximum punishment of life imprisonment.  
The state government also submitted that jail authorities in Rajasthan are taking ample precautions to curb the spread of Covid-19 among inmates. 
Accepting the government’s submissions, the court now noted that no new ground had been raised by Asaram in his application and rejected it.
Also read: HC pulls up Yogi govt over bad internet for state lawyers, calls it ‘impediment to justice’
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
The conviction of Asaramji bapu was because of his few ashramites who framed the case and made him to be in jail without even a single bail and they finally were successful in taking the case to the level where he was falsely found to be guilty by giving false documents and using highly paid fraud advocates.
Shame on the judiciary
These corrupt just want to keep an innocent saint in jail. The people who have done this will pay a heavy price for their dirty deeds
Hari om
We respect the Decision of Guraj HC, but on these facts,
Where is the right of Senior Citizen goes,
Asaram Bapuji is a senior citizen having an age of 80+ years.
At this age human body needs relaxation.
Gujarat HC decision not to give plea, on these bases is out of understanding for any common person,
Every one knows the comfort and conditions of jail,
Even a young man feels bad in jail conditions , then how can we expect from a senior citizen to that age.
Can HC answer to these of my questions:
1. Why bail is given to Sanjay Dutt
2. Why bail is given to Salman khan
3. Why to Bishops Franco mullkal.
Are they don’t have any fan following.
We want these answers from HC !
Sad to hear this news as 80 year old person should get bail but our judiciary’s decision is always negative in case of asaramji bapu… And that too without any proofs !
All are excuses. When in mid night you can open court and decisions can be taken on urgent basis, why not now ?
Bail is the second thing to discuss first thing is the court should accept that the whole case is bogus.
Why are they not showing the real FIR ? Where is that medical report ? Where is that girl? Why people who know truth are not being presented like the friend of that girl, phone records of the family who filed complaint and many others. They are just covering the real story for some personal and political reason.
But truth will come and everyone will see the consequences of this shameful deed.
Ye bas ek bahana hai unhe bail na deneka, jab ki bapujika koi dosh hai hi nai, pr fir b unhe itne salo se jail me rakha hai, bina kisi sabut or gawah ke unhe hail me rakhana chal sakta hai to bail deneme kya ho raha hai. Jinhone kabhi kisika bura nai chaha fir unk sath anyay q kiya ja raha hai. Court jan buj kar  unhe bail nai de rahi hai. Wo aplogo ko nai samjhega guru ka mahatwa or guru ko apne jiwan me pane ka saubhagya har kisiko nai milta. Sirf or sirf apne Hindustan me hi aisa hota hai ki criminals bahar ghumte hai or desh bhakta ko jail me dala jata hai. Hindustan me bas Hinduo ki hi koi value nai hai.
Having so many followers around the world doesn’t end someone’s human right . Bapu is 84 years old and there is no evidence of rape or any physical assault . Then on what ground he is being kept behind the the bars .
Indian judiciary has double standards for granting bail. The rich and powerful get easy bail, but Hindu saints are not given bail for a single day.
Too sad !!!
Many got bail but not for a 85 year old saint,
during this pandemic also.
