Priyanka’s ‘ghar-ghar ki kahaani’ on News 18 India & why NDTV’s Ravish hails the Centre
New Delhi: Prime time debates were buzzing about like busybees. And, guess what? The coronavirus pandemic made a comeback. The alleged custodial deaths in Tamil Nadu was also hotly discussed.
Hindi news channels focussed on more news from the Gandhi clan: Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra being asked to vacate her government-allotted house in New Delhi, by the Centre.
On News 18 India, her impending move to Lucknow from Delhi led to a rather creative headline ‘siyaasat ghar-ghar ki’.
Anchor Amish Devgan listed out the three reasons why the notice asking the Congress leader to vacate her Delhi residence was not “badla”.
He also asked BJP’s Sambit Patra, “Dozens of politicians have said a lot of things—like she is Indira Gandhi’s granddaughter, how will you remove her from their hearts?.”
Patra, who declared that he was speaking for all Indians, replied, “Not one, not two but the entire India has said ‘enough is enough’ to the Gandhi parivaar.”
He added, “The people are saying ‘ab boriya bistar lapetlo’ to them”.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 

On NDTV India, Ravish Kumar discussed and dissected the Covid-19 ‘Drug Discovery Hackathon’ that was launched by the central government Thursday.
The Human Resource Development Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal invited students, researchers and professionals to participate in the Hackathon and work towards developing anti-Covid drugs.
“It’s expected to be the world’s biggest open innovation model,” commented Kumar.
In an uncharacteristic move for the normally critical Kumar, he supported the government on this but also added that they ought to have released the budget allocated for this Hackathon as well.
“Drugs/medicines cannot be discovered without a budget,” he said, in a subtle jibe.

Mirror Now’s Tanvi Shukla was concerned with the ‘big question’ — why states weren’t following the same norms to record deaths and what was causing the ‘massive mismatch’ in data?
A data reconciliation exercise was conducted by the Mumbai administration Wednesday, which increased the mortality rate in the city from 3 per cent to 5.66 per cent.
She asked  NCP spokesperson Mahesh Tapase, “How is it that the authorities came to know about this discrepancy and how are you going about fixing it now?”
Tapase gave a rather lukewarm response, “Let me assure you that the Maharashtra government is doing its best to combat Covid. We have been receiving reports regarding the mismatch of numbers which has now been corrected.”
He didn’t really help his case as he almost admitted the discrepancy, “Initially, there may have been some discrepancies but subsequently they were corrected but that is not by intention nor by design but by oversight by whoever is scanning the numbers.”

ET Now’s Avanne Dubash revealed that the central government is finally looking to private investment in passenger trains. Dubash explained, “Railway minister announced qualification proposals from private entities to run trains over 109 routes by introducing 151 modern trains. This project is going to entail private sector investments to the tune of about Rs 30,000 crore rupees.”
Dubash proceeded to list out all the benefits of the move — “It’s going to be a major thumbs-up for the sector as a whole as now… this move is going to introduce modern technology, reduced transit time, a boost to job creation, enhanced safety for the sector and also provide world class travel experience to the customers and passengers.” Wah.
Anchor Deepak Chaurasia on News Nation was as usual barking up another tree.. He talked about how the conditions of Hindus in Rajasthan’s Mewat have deteriorated due to Muslims.
Sounding like a conspiracy theorist, he said, “We bring you new case stories everyday, to show you how a dangerous conspiracy has been cooking for decades to remove Hindus from Hindustan.”
And then he was back to Tablighi Jamaat — “Kya Mewat mein Jamaatiyon ka kanoon chalta hai”
The ‘tukde tukde’ gang also made a guest appearance in the cast of villains.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
