Republic on Sushant ‘murder’, Times Now ‘super stunner’ letter, tribute to Rahat Indori
New Delhi: There’s more of the same and then some shows with a difference. While Times Now and Republic TV, predictably, continued their investigations into the Sushant Singh Rajput case and reached a conclusion that satisfied them, NewsX focused on the economy and NDTV India shone a spotlight on the legacy of Urdu poet and Hindi film lyricist Rahat Indori, who died earlier Tuesday.
On Republic TV, anchor Arnab Goswami aggressively debated actor Sushant Singh Rajput’s “murder” and questioned why “Lutyens journalists” are trying to defend actor Rhea Chakraborty who is currently being investigated by the ED.
Showing a photograph of what he claimed was Rajput’s neck after his death, he asked forensics expert Dr Bhoopesh Kumar Sharma whether the actor hanged himself. “I cannot believe that these are the ligature marks of hanging. I challenge them to create the same mark on a dummy body by hanging,” replied Sharma.
Lawyer Rizwan Merchant valiantly tried to stick to the facts. “After the completion of the investigation, Mumbai Police will file a report and then we can say whether they are right or wrong,” he said.

Times Now saw anchor Navika Kumar bring us a “super stunner” — a loving letter that Rajput had reportedly written to his sister, which Kumar said completely rubbished Chakraborty’s claims that his relations with his family had soured.
Later, Padmaja Joshi asked if there is a “beta link” in the Maharashtra government, in a clear swipe at the Shiv Sena’s Aaditya Thackeray. When Joshi asked if a CBI investigation was necessary since there were “speculations” and “concerns” that young Thackeray has a hand to play in the case, BJP spokesperson Shweta Shalini was firm, “This case is not about jurisdiction and justice has no jurisdiction.”
And lawyer Ashish Dixit maintained, “The political blame game has started rather than investigating the matter.”

On NewsX, anchor Rishabh Gulati and Business World editor-in-chief Anurag Batra eschewed the Rajput investigation for a panel on how India should boost its economy through innovation. When Gulati asked if “indirect” cash assistance was the need of the hour, Tim Nicolle, CEO of UK-based global trade finance provider PrimaDollar, disagreed.
“I don’t think there’s a magic bullet,” he said. “We need to distinguish between a credit problem and a liquidity problem… There’s a fundamental credit problem — everyone has lost money.”

Zee News‘ Sudhir Chaudhary took a rather offbeat route for his prime time segment, with a discussion on what people should adopt from “Shri Krishna”, on the occasion of Janmashtami. Chaudhary asked, “In today’s world, can Shri Krishna help you out or have his formulas become outdated?” Explaining that Govind is another name for Krishna, Chaudhary tried rhyming “Covid” with “Govind” and asked, “Will Govind help in the time of Covid?” Marks for effort, if nothing else.
He then said that during the Covid crisis, everybody was worried about the uncertain future and felt bleak about the road ahead, and then drew a parallel to the same fears Arjun felt in the Mahabharat, which Lord Krishna helped him out of.

And on NDTV India, Ravish Kumar devoted his prime time segment to Rahat Indori, who had died a day after he tested positive for Covid-19. Kumar began his show by reciting a couplet by Indori and then said,”Corona has taken a braveheart and a fearless poet from us.”
Speaking about his education and his connection to the city Indore, Kumar said, “You cannot gauge the life of a poet solely on the basis of a television programme but he was stubborn. It was almost as though he was at odds with the entire world with his poetry.” He recited more verses and couplets by the poet, who was known to stick his neck out on sociopolitical issues.
One of his famous lines, which Kumar recited, was “Sabhi ka khoon hai shaamil yahaan ki mitti mein, Kisi ke baap ka Hindustan thodi hai” (Everyone’s blood is mixed in with the soil. Hindustan isn’t the property of anyone’s father). Kumar explained the type of Hindustan Indori was speaking about and how this line became a rallying cry during the protests against the CAA and NRC.

Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
Why news media is in crisis & How you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
