MHRD seeks parents’ opinion on when to reopen schools — August, September or October
New Delhi: With educational institutions indefinitely shut due to the Covid-19 pandemic, the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) is now seeking parents’ opinions on when to reopen schools this year.
In a letter to education secretaries of all states Friday, the ministry directed them to get the feedback of parents on when they would want the schools to reopen and what changes they expect to be introduced in schools.
The letter, a copy of which has been accessed by ThePrint, asked secretaries to ascertain if parents will be comfortable with reopening schools in August, September or October.
“What is the likely period when they will be comfortable with reopening of schools — August/September/October, 2020 and what are the parents expectations from schools as and when they re-open,” read the letter.
The ministry asked the states to file their responses by 20 July.
The decision to reopen educational institutions will eventually be undertaken only after due permissions from the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), but the MHRD is taking this feedback so the process can be initiated.
The ministry is also in the process of finalising guidelines for schools to follow once they reopen. These include staggered attendance in schools and calling only senior students.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: 67% marks in board exams aren’t the end of the world. Just ask this Punjab IPS officer
Parents of schoolgoing children have been for some time opposing reopening of schools during the pandemic, with many starting online petitions against the move.
In June, a group called Parents Association started a petition saying reopening of schools during the time of pandemic will be like “playing with fire”.
A survey conducted in June by LocalCircles —a polling platform on issues of governance, public and consumer interest — revealed that 70 per cent parents want schools to reopen only 21 days after there are zero cases of Covid-19 in the country.
The study noted that many parents were unsure that norms of social distancing will be followed in schools once they reopen.
Schools across the country have been shut since March in the wake of the pandemic.
Most schools are imparting lessons through online classes.
Also read: CBSE declares Class 12 results without a merit list, girls again outperform boys
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
School reopen in August from 1 August because students will sucide some students have sucide so school is reopen compolsary nahi to bacchesucide kar lenge
To go office, we are scared & on this sending kids to school is next to impossible.
No school is fit to maintain toilets, wash basins, There are huge chances of Community Spread. Portions should be reduced & having no other choice OnLine classes should be promoted with Time limits. Unless we see a steep down ward graph, we cant take chances of our loved ones.
School should be reopen in august but only for senior classes with proper guidelines and SOP’s. Because it’s all about mental health of the students. Students are feeling frustrated and depressed in this situation which is more dangarous than corona virus. Online classes can’t replace the physical classes and that environment. Physical classes makes student teacher interaction and student to student interaction very easier, which is very important to understanding of the student, also provides the positive attitude to the growing child.
schools can reopen from november 2020.
Sir reopen the college in august
Schools should be reopen in November 2020 as tha cases of corona increases day by day
College should be reopen from 1 August
School should not be reopen this academic year till the time everything is normal
School should not be reopen this academic year
School should be allowed to reopen in the green zone where there is no cases of covid.But only for seniors students.The school area should be observed by administrator.And  no foreign people should be allowed to enter that area.Its border should be sealed.school should be sanitized regularly.school management must be careful about social distancing.
I think they can open on August because vaccine created and 99%of people affected can be cured and another thing we have to consider is that flu is more worse than corona because no one affected with flu survived during the pandemic situation but corona is slightly better.
Please don’t waste children precious timings try to reopen schools as soon as possible with proper precautions for all kids
School and colleges must be reopened in August Through online classes students can’t understand to much
No school,collages shouldn’t be open until the vaccine is available among the masses if government open the schools it will be like playing with fire.
IF THE MINISTERS WANTS TO OPEN THE SCHOOLS THEY SHOULD REMEMBER THAT THEY HAVE ALSO CHILDS
I as an eleventh grade student agree to reopening the schools in mid aug or early sep, and as for parents who are disagreeing, i implore you to think about your childrens mental state right now, think beyond just their protectiveness, you cannot keep them in forever, you have no idea what four hours of online school, plus four hours of tuitions and other research online does to teenagers, you have no idea of the helplessness we fell being locked in for over 120 days. Going out may infect us, but sitting inside chew our brains and strains our eyes. Corona won’t kill us sitting at home, but feeling dead inside will one day. We as teenagers are not asking the govt to open the whole student body, we r asking you to slowly reopen high schools,
ALL JOURNEYS BEGIN WITH A SINGLE STEP. its time adults understand that.
Schools should open only after October 2020 if conditions are normal and we have proper vaccine….until can’t risk life of children when cases are rising to 40000+ cases everyday nowdays……they should not think of opening now at all
See I know as a parent that education is also necessary but at such time of pandemic everyone should realise that many adults like us are being so cautious in taking decisions to go for work or not so the schools should not open right now ,it is no point that that the govt is trying to reduce the cases and suddenly schools open and the cases again jumps to the sky.The schools shall remain closed till the cases reduce at a very high rate and vaccine is ready and there should be mechanisms of cbse to mark the students on the bases of internal assessment this year for class 10 and 12 as this year have been very different and like in any other year the children are not ready with their revisions in the form of school assessments so there should not be so much burden on them.
Are you mad or something! Life comes before education and money
Is life not important? How can anyone even think reopening of schools ? Some children are saying that schools should  open because they are afraid that they will not be able to make up this year no matter what happens to them because of covid 19. We as a senior mature responsible people have to think what is good for them . Are studies more important than life of any child? Just think about it.
after completely end of Corona school will reopen.
Not now school reopen when Covid vaccine is ready
No schools should not Reopen right now it is because it is very difficult to reopen schools in August 2020 school will reopen in Sap 2020 as soon as COVID-19 vaccine Comes in India schools  can reopen
No schools should not Reopen right now it is because it is very difficult to reopen schools in August 2020 school will reopen in Sap 2020 as soon as COVID-19 vaccine Comes in India schools  can reopen
We should keep on eye on the situation. As the covid19 situation is worsening day by day in our country and in our state of West Bengal also. I think it is not the right time to think about resuming the school.  However it may be taken into account after October. It is more precious of my kid’s life comparing one year of his education.
Corona khatam ho jaane ke bad hi school Khulna chahie
Schools should reopen after October 2020
School should be close upto vaccine are coming in market but entrance and board classes will be open
When this situation of corona virus gone
Then only  I allow my child to go to school in my opinion as a parent
That’s a too good thing but at least people should not demand online classes let this year postpone, as a parent you people have this responsibility too that your child don’t suicide because of the heavy load of online classes. As a students I know how useless online classes are. We should ask government not to conduct the. And declare this year as zero academic year.
In my opinion school should open not before October.
University should be reopen in mind of August or beginning od September.
Schools  should not open until 0 cases observe.  As our children  are not for experiments.And all private schools should  be under government control for everything.  So that parents should not get humiliated  by schools.Thankyou
Good evening  when the covid complete cure in the India,then after schools roepen.
LIFE IS EVERYTHING
How you can play with children’s life..
NO
Sir in online class there are so many problems that u sir reopen the school from October
Schools should reopen in October 2020
Reopening school in august is very bad idea its mean we play with fire safety of students is more important than study plz i requset to government don,t reopen school  untill the vaccine realise
Schools should reopen as soon as possible
Y r u playing with ur child’s life. 😔
We request the government to take immediate measures in reopening the schools back again
It would be better if schools get started because students are finding it so difficult to study through online classes. We request the government to take immediate measures in reopening the schools back again
