Lahore student picked up for making ‘anti-state’ speeches returns home
New Delhi: Student uprisings are not unique to India. Pakistan too has been witnessing protests on educational campuses.
An MPhil student of Punjab University in Lahore was allegedly picked up by “unidentified men” early Thursday morning after his protest against the arrest of Awami Workers Party (AWP) activists. He has since returned home.
Mohsin Abdali is part of the Progressive Students Collective in Punjab University, where he is pursuing MPhil in Agricultural Sciences.
He returned home Thursday evening after reportedly spending nearly 12 hours in the custody of law enforcement agencies. 
According to a Dawn report, Abdali was taken into custody for making “anti-state” speeches at various rallies.
A complaint filed by Abdali’s family says unidentified men with arms barged into their house at 4 am and began beating up the family before dragging Abdali away at gunpoint. 
The last rally Abdali had attended before he was picked up was organised by the Women Democratic Front that called for the release of AWP activists.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
His abduction sparked outrage among activists, who demanded his release on the grounds of freedom of expression. 
We are organizing Azaadi Camp to protest abduction of student leader Mohsin Abdali. His whereabouts are still unknown. 
We will raise voice against country-wide crackdown on activists. Join us to defend our constitutional rights! #ReleaseMohsinAbdali #ReleaseIslamabadProtestors pic.twitter.com/PF8i9RCrr7
— Ammar Ali Jan (@ammaralijan) January 30, 2020

Thousands of Chinese nationals travel to and stay in Balochistan for the ongoing China-Pakistan Economic Corridor activities, making it a high-risk place for contracting the deadly new coronavirus.
Fatima Jinnah Chest Hospital in Quetta is therefore preparing to deal with the situation by creating an isolation ward for anyone suspected to be carrying the deadly new virus. 
“The people of Quetta, Killa Abdullah, Pishin and Chaman are vulnerable to the coronavirus because they visited China for trade purposes,” said Dr Sadiq Baloch, adding that a 14-member technical team has been constituted to tackle coronavirus cases, if they come up.
Also read: ‘No lipstick on campus’ — a ban Pakistan university had to lift after outcry
Two female polio vaccinators were murdered Wednesday in Swabi city by unidentified assailants, following which polio workers in the area have announced a boycott of the ongoing anti-polio campaign until they’re given better safety. 
Two women were on a vaccination drive in the Parmuli area of Razar Tehsil when the unidentified men came on a motorcycle and shot them dead. 
The government has constituted a three-member panel to investigate the murders. 
Pakistan suffers from misinformation regarding polio.
According to The Organisation for World Peace, rumours began circulating in April 2019 that polio vaccines were dangerous and unsafe. Since 2012, there have been 47 instances of polio-related violence. 
