Goswami’s battle lesson, Liyaquat’s ‘teekhi’ debate, ‘badtameez Jamaat brigade ’ on Zee News
New Delhi: With Prime Minister Narendra Modi hinting at a possible extension of the nationwide lockdown, prime time news anchors were preoccupied by the implications of this decision, in different ways.
On India Today, Rajdeep Sardesai continued his state-wise analysis on whether they needed the lockdown extended or lifted, while Republic TV’s Arnab Goswami tried to brace his viewers for the long battle ahead with a long monologue.
Zee News and ABP News focused on reports of an alleged incident of unruly behaviour at a quarantine centre in Dwarka where some people linked to Tablighi Jamaat are under isolation.
Goswami, on Republic TV, was feeling rather sagacious — “Tell yourself every moment again and many times a day, this is a phase, it’s not forever”. He assured his viewers that this mantra will make people more determined in fighting in the “battlefield we are all in”.
He warned that areas would be sealed, and there would be hardships, but instead of resisting we needed to respect hotspots and enforce containment measures. “This is the time, you must not be cavalier about it,” he pronounced, almost like an army general preparing for war.
On Zee News’ ‘Taal Thok Ke’, host Aman Chopra focused on how ‘PM Modi ne diya lockdown badhane ke sanket’ (PM Modi indicated possible extension of lockdown).
Then, shifting focus, Chopra asked, “Jamaat badtameez brigade ka kab ilaaj hoga?” (when will the insolent Jamaat brigade be cured?). He was referring to reports accusing Tablighi Jamaat of misbehaviour at a quarantine centre in Delhi.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“Aap samajh rahe hain na kiss tarah ka ilaaj inka karne ka zarurat hain,” (You understand what sort of cure they need, right) he said rhetorically. No, Mr. Chopra, we actually don’t know.

‘Seedha Sawal’ on ABP News was alongn the same lines. Host Rubika Liyaquat welcomed viewers to her “teekhi” (spicy) 5 pm debate, and discussed how despite the lockdown cases have crossed the 5000 mark.
“Aap jaante hi hain, iski sab se badi wajah kya hain?,” (You know right, what the reason for all of this is?) she asked. And if anyone was still confused by who she was referring to, she cleared it up pretty quickly. Tablighi Jamaat, she declared dramatically, adding that people must not hesitate to even speculate that they are solely responsible.
Discussing the incident of alleged misbehaviour, she listed many other alleged unruly behaviour by Jamaat members in places like Narela and Ghaziabad. “With cases like this all over the country, you tell me, how will we win the war against corona?” she asked.

India Today’s Sardesai focused on the central government identifying 20 hotspots in Delhi and Uttar Pradesh, which have to be sealed completely.
Continuing his state-wise report, he spoke to many state leaders, including Trinamool Congress MP Derek O’Brien from West Bengal. With 99 confirmed cases, 5 deaths, and 13 recovered in the state, O’Brien said that he didn’t have an answer about the lockdown extension as that was a call Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee will announce in a few days.
He was, however, very keen on explaining how the state government was battling Covid-19. He broke it down — CM Banerjee happens to be the Health Minister and Home Minister of the state, and there is a global advisory board operating under her, which includes Nobel laureate Abhijit Banerjee, and also a team of local health experts, along with several task forces looking at economy and implementation.
“Your testing is still below national standards,” Sardesai told him. “We are waiting for testing kits,” O’Brien finally said.

Al Jazeera discussed how many believe coronavirus doesn’t discriminate among people, considering the number of rich, famous and powerful people who have contracted the virus. “But that doesn’t tell the full story,” said the anchor. She explained how data suggests that if you’re poor or from an ethnic minority, you’re more likely to get sick or die. “Covid-19 is killing Black Americans at a higher rate than anyone else,” she said.
She referred to Gary Harell, a Louisiana resident who has lost 10 friends to coronavirus — eight were African-American, one was Hispanic and one was Caucasian. The State of Louisiana’s recently released data shows a disproportionate number of African-Americans being affected by the coronavirus — so far 70 per cent of the total Covid-19 positive patients in the state are African Americans, even though they only make up one-third of the population.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
All those who are commenting on jamatis, none of you are commenting on the trip of yogi to ayodhya with his full army brigade after lockdown announced by PM . None of you are commenting on the devotees hiding in the temples and rescued by luxury buses by the Gujarati motabhai with special passes,  none of you are commenting on the rescue of devotees from gurdwara in Delhi, none of you are commenting on the thousands of migrants at the bus stations without any distancing, and safeties on the roads walking to their homes in full distress and some have died due to hunger and tiredness.  This bloody Arnab is indeed a barking dog of BJP, if you are blaming jamatis, then you have to blame all of them. Arnab you and your so called godi media troupe is biased and pimps of BJP.
Arnab behavior is more worst seems like. He is trying to hidden original agenda of how politicians are cheating public and compete country from all aspects including hampering the economy and peace of the nation, the person who have zero tolerance to live with any community in India except their own and their political fathers no other word to them they will sell their mothers wife and sisters also like the way Arnab is and i can’t believe being educated you are appreciating him for killing secularism in the country
All channels including that farrow Ahmed and Russell ian favours are said to curry favour by ignoring some important news and exaggerating some unimportant news. Those left and west leaning are known to be paid media. Arnab
invites some left leaning and “secular” muslims to show us what is in their mind – to destroy the Hindu civilization. India TV’s Rajat Sharma is also talking the truth. Those journalists from abrahamic faith wants that Indiam should caress them for their views alone. Sorry, my dear, the Hindus, except the confused ones (liberals) are aware and whatever you say about Arnab, Zee news, india TV or News X, we are not going to believe, because we are Hindus (that doesn’t mean that we do not respect Abrahamic faith), and we do not subscribe to everything what some other English channels cover with bias.
Rather, these all are barkings from the Arnab critics new anti natinals. India can smell the foul smell from burning of hearts of these handful anti nationals. THEY SIMPLY ARE BARKING DOGS, WHILE THE ‘ KING ARNAB’ IS ROAMING GRACEFULLY.
Arnab, you undressed these antinatinals naked.
You made Indians realize the true colours of these parasites.
Otherwise, why they have not condemned Tablighis open heartedly a single time but don’t leave a chance to criticize RSS, a truly nationalist organisation, on drop of a hat? 
I rightly call them communal, anti nationals and barking dogs.
Clap for all the bigots commenting on communal and hatred news rather than focusing on motivating people to move on through this crisis period..
It seems few are not upto the grade of fifth in thinking n commenting. When it comes to minority with half n more dozen kids should be removed identifying as minorities first…New classification of minorities required for having one or two kids ..Then can be decided who is  all these absurd minorities possessing tag..99% will be wiped out from the minority list for sure, contributing burden on the national income n resources atleast..When it is their time to bark without contributing much to sceince n technology ..why they use it .Seems are in utter confusion..in all aspects of life. That is why these people cannot judge what is wrong n what is right…yet
Arnab ghoswami has humiliated the entire fraternity of journalists. He just bark nothing else. It seems he is being paid for barking. Why don’t he invite few barking dog and do competition with them rather than doing with Human beings.
अर्नब जी आप बहुत अच्छे वक्ता है।लेकिन अब लोगो ने आपकी डिबेट को भौंकना कहना शुरू कर दिया है शायद बहुत गलत नहीं है।हर चैनल का किसी न किसी पॉलिटिकल पार्टी से जुड़ाव होता है परन्तु इतना अच्छा नहीं है ।आपको मेरी एक सलाह है।
आप भाजपा के लिए एक बहुत अच्छे भांट का रोल निभा रहे है।भाजपा के बजाय भारत माता के लिए भांट का रोल के तो हम आपको सर आखो पर बैठाते।
भांट का अर्थ एक विशेष समुदाय से है जो पहले राजाओं के दरबार में पाए जाते थे।चाटुकार समझिए
some of the so called minorities time and again have shown their true face. and are prepared to go to any extent to bring down /destroy,our country by any means;  it is the most top priority of the govt to burn out the weeds without any hesitation.
Arnab is the only journalist who can call a spade a spade in the world, the whole of India knows who are our enemies, they should be wiped out. Hats off to gutsy Arnab
Best example of bad journalist ARNAB..
We have idiocies of nature like Russel Ian and Farooq Ahmed whose only agenda is Modi or Hindu bashing even in such times. These guys should thank their stars that they are living in India and not in any other country and can freely vomit out excreta from their mouths.
Alleged misbehavior of the Tablighis?  That is rich.  There is no evidence that they did this on purpose but their subsequent behaviour/ misbehavior suggests a sadistic pleasure in putting the country and the government in trouble.
Mr. Russel Ian and Mr.Farooq Ahmed,
