Looking for ways to kill lockdown drudgery? Take tips from Bhagwat, Tejasvi Surya, Rijiju
New Delhi: On 22 March, during the janata curfew, Women and Child Development Minister Smriti Irani decided to fight the boredom by starting an antakshari on Twitter. Her efforts went viral with Bollywood director Karan Johar, celebrity consultant Suhel Seth and even cabinet colleague Prakash Javadekar joining in. 
We are a 130 crore family so tag karna mushkil hai ki next kaun gaana uthayega isiliye sing / tweet a song coz ye apni marzi wala #TwitterAntakshari hai ..
— Smriti Z Irani (@smritiirani) March 22, 2020
Now with a 21-day lockdown in place to battle the coronavirus pandemic, various politicians and public figures have pitched in with suggestions to pass the time,from reading inspirational books, doing yoga and upgrading educational skills online.
RSS sarsanghchalak Mohan Bhagwat has put out a video telling swayamsevaks not to be disappointed that the lockdown will deprive them of their shakhas. He has urged his swayamsevaks to pray at their homes, practice yoga and help their respective district administrations while ensuring social distancing.   
वर्ष प्रतिपदा (विक्रमी संवत 2077, 25 मार्च,2020) के अवसर पर पू. सरसंघचालक डॉ. मोहनजी भागवत का संदेश :https://t.co/hFGkMvpcAWhttps://t.co/Q5YWdvAOUE#वर्ष_प्रतिपदा pic.twitter.com/aSjeLVgYy4
— RSS (@RSSorg) March 25, 2020
BJP general secretary (organisation) B.L. Santosh has urged his party workers to call 10 people in their phone books and ensure that they stay at home. Santosh has said that people are only getting used to the lockdown and hence they need to be told to stay home.   
Sports Minister Kiren Rijiju is a fitness freak and in keeping with his interests has appealed to everyone “to take up the simple exercise of Skipping Rope”. Rijiju tweeted that it was part of the Sports Authority Of India’s #FitIndiaMovement.     
SAI is promoting #FitIndiaMovement during the 21-Day lockdown. I appeal everyone to take up this simple exercise of Skipping Rope (रस्सी कूदना) at home. You can share it too. let's unite online, while maintaining social distance. रस्सी पकड़-भारत जोड़#IndiaFightsCorona pic.twitter.com/91hM3U75w6
— Kiren Rijiju (@KirenRijiju) March 25, 2020

 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Human Resource Development Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank has urged primary, secondary and senior secondary students to make use of the National Repository of Open Educational Resources in different Indian languages in their free time at home. The minister also urged students to enhance their skills through the Swayam Prabha, a set of 32 DTH channels that produce educational content. 
#COVID19Wondering what to do while stuck indoors? Add more to your knowledge base!Give a try to #NROER – it hosts educational resources in various subjects & in different Indian languages for Primary, Secondary & Sr Secondary classes.#FightagainstCoronavirus pic.twitter.com/i7Tu10BRgi
— Dr Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank (@DrRPNishank) March 24, 2020

Former BJP general secretary (organisation) has a unique advice for those in lock down. His suggestion to avoid the coronavirus is for people to use the hand that is not their favoured one. “If you are right-handed, then use your left hand to open the door and lift things. If you are left-handed, then use your right hand for daily purposes. This is because you will use your favoured hand to touch your face.” 
एक महत्वपूर्ण पहल.
आप Right Hander है तो Left Hand और यदि आप Left Hander है  तो Right Hand का उपयोग ग़ैर प्रमुख कार्यों जैसे दरवाजा-लिफ़्ट खोलने इत्यादि कार्यों में करें क्योंकि आप उस हाथ से अपना चेहरा मुश्किल से ही छूते हैं मतलब कम Use करते हैं।
कई जगह इसके सफल प्रयोग हुए हैं।
— Ramlal (@Ramlal) March 24, 2020

 
For the Bengaluru South MP Tejasvi Surya, entertainment during the 21-day lockdown comes from the Congress’ Instagram handle. He tweeted that “they come up with some really hilarious content”. 
To keep you entertained for the 21 day lock-down, you may follow ⁦@INCIndia⁩ on Instagram. They come up with some really hilarious content. pic.twitter.com/vC2IPknC5n
— Tejasvi Surya (@Tejasvi_Surya) March 24, 2020
Also read: Coronavirus: Latest updates on cases in India, all you need to know about COVID-19
 
