Modi govt’s evacuation plan could include Indians stranded in US, UK apart from the Gulf
New Delhi: The Narendra Modi government’s massive evacuation plan for Indians stuck abroad could involve not just the Gulf countries but also the US and countries in Europe, ThePrint has learnt.
While modalities are still being worked out, government sources said that a team for the evacuation process is being set up to coordinate not just with the countries concerned but also with state governments.
While sources did say the evacuation will be massive, they did not elaborate on the actual numbers involved. Those who will be evacuated will include Indians who have lost their jobs or whose work permits have expired.
“The evacuation process will involve countries in the Gulf, the US and Europe. Modalities are still being worked out to see if it would be complete Europe or just the UK,” a source told ThePrint.
According to the plan being worked on, India will be deploying assets from the Indian Navy, Indian Air Force and Air India primarily.
ThePrint had on 28 April reported that the Modi government is working on an evacuation plan focusing on the Gulf countries.
Also read: Indian Navy designs air pod for safe evacuation of Covid-19 patients from remote locations
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Sources involved in the process said that the Indians stranded will need to be tested before being cleared for evacuation. A decision is yet to be taken on whether these people will be tested by Indian officials or if they need to produce a medical certificate stating they are not infected.
In all likelihood, Indians will need to produce the medical certificate before boarding.
However, all evacuees will be quarantined in their respective states upon arrival in India, sources said.
Once plans are finalised, a team of officers will also be deputed within the Ministry of External Affairs to take care of the massive evacuation process.
They could be added to the existing Covid-19 cell within the ministry, sources said.
The MEA has been the lead agency for the task and is coordinating with the defence and the civil aviation ministries besides state governments and the Prime Minister’s Office.
In a briefing by the Service Chiefs and Chief of Defence Staff General Bipin Rawat Friday, the forces said about 30 aircraft and several ships are on standby for the evacuation exercise.
“We are fully ready … our ships are ready. We will go and bring them back. This will be a continuous process for some time,” Navy Chief Admiral Karambir Singh said.
IAF chief Air Chief Marshal R.K.S. Bhadauria said 28-30 aircraft are ready for the evacuation.
India had carried out one of the biggest evacuations ever in the world when it brought back about 1.7 lakh citizens in 1990 after Iraq went to war with Kuwait.
In 2015, India evacuated over 5,500 people, including 1000 foreign nationals from Yemen, after Saudi Arabia launched air strikes against Iranian-allied Houthi rebels.
Also read: Stay put, be patient, Modi govt tells Indians stuck abroad, asks NRIs and OCIs to help out
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
