‘I for India’ — Shah Rukh, Priyanka, Virat Kohli to come together for Covid concert Sunday
New Delhi: Several Indian and international celebrities will come together for a virtual concert called ‘I for India’ at 7.30 pm (IST) Sunday (3 May) with an aim to raise money for the India COVID Response Fund (ICRF).
Hosted by Facebook, the event is being called India’s biggest fundraiser concert. Apart from some of the biggest names in the film and music industry, the concert will also have sportspersons and industrialists taking part in it.
All proceeds from the concert will go to the ICRF managed by GiveIndia, an online donation platform.
Shah Rukh Khan, A.R. Rahman, Akshay Kumar, Aamir Khan, Hrithik Roshan, Priyanka Chopra Jonas, Vidya Balan, Ayushmann Khurrana and an eclectic mix of musicians such as Ustad Zakir Hussain, Papon and the Shillong Chamber Choir will take part in the concert.
Indian cricket captain Virat Kohli and opening batsman Rohit Sharma will also extend their support to the cause.
Western musicians like Bryan Adams, Mick Jagger, Nick Jonas, Sophie Turner and Will Smith, along with actors like Kate Bosworth, Mindy Kaling and Jack Black will also be part of the event.
#IFORINDIA, the concert for our times. 3rd May, 7:30pm IST. Watch it LIVE worldwide on Facebook. 100% of proceeds go to the India COVID Response Fund set up by @GiveIndiaTune in – https://t.co/40YfnuPPL7 Donate now – https://t.co/aqTx4KfFuxDo your bit. #SocialForGood pic.twitter.com/oIatCRj6as
— dulquer salmaan (@dulQuer) May 1, 2020

We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: YouTube to host world’s biggest film festivals in 10-day streaming event
The event is aimed at entertaining people practicing social isolation and also gather funds for those financially hit by the lockdown. It also seeks to pay tribute to the frontline workers battling Covid-19.
The event organisers aim to collect Rs 60,000,000, out of which ₹1,029,828 have already been donated by 724 individuals in the last two days.
The concert will be aided by Facebook’s new feature called ‘Facebook Fundraisers’ that is meant to allow people to utilise the power of the platform and direct resources to help initiatives that seek to better lives.
Also read: Pink Floyd will stream free concerts every Friday for fans to ‘get through’ quarantine
