Shaheen Bagh marks janata curfew by holding ‘symbolic protest’, petrol bomb hurled at it
New Delhi: Protesters at Shaheen Bagh in the capital are continuing with their demonstration against the Citizenship Amendment Act in symbolic fashion Sunday, as the country shuts down for a 14-hour ‘janata curfew’ to combat the spread of the coronavirus.
The protesters had originally announced that they would continue as usual on the day of the curfew called by PM Narendra Modi in a TV broadcast Thursday. However, as the appointed hour of 7am approached Sunday, protesters vacated the site, instead laying out their slippers and shoes on the wide benches to mark their symbolic presence.
“We aren’t ending the protest, come what may. But we are mindful of the danger of the coronavirus. So, we adopted this fashion of protest for the day,” Khurshid Alam, one of the organisers of the protest, told ThePrint.
Alam added that women over 60 and children had already been disallowed from the site, with no protester allowed to sit-in for more than four hours.
“Today, only five women will be protesting at a time,” said another organiser, Ritu Kaushik, adding that the normal protest will resume after the janata curfew ends at 9pm.
Also read: ‘Janata curfew’ impact: Cities across India deserted, many trains & flights suspended
The morning of the curfew was also marked by a fire scare at the Shaheen Bagh protest site, as a petrol bomb was allegedly thrown near one of the protest barricades.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Delhi: Protesters at Shaheen Bagh allege that a petrol bomb was hurled nearby the anti-Citizenship Amendment Act protest site today pic.twitter.com/tHVzQfmKii
— ANI (@ANI) March 22, 2020

“We don’t know who it was. Someone on a bike came with some petrol and did this. But locals immediately controlled the situation and doused the fire,” Kaushik said, adding that the unknown assailant fled the scene.
No injuries are reported to have taken place.
Also read: What the word ‘curfew’ means & how janata curfew isn’t literally one
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Yes. Why only the Tahir Hussains. Darr sabko lagna chahiye.
tell me one line in CAA which says your citizenship would be taken away. Reply here if you have any apart from rhetoric!! Next query Who is funding this agitation for such long? Hows ur household running if you are all camping there? Its ur religion who teaches every non beleiver is a KAFFER, not any other. And this brainwashing starts the day a child is born and it happens five times a day . So u can boast of creating the most heinous terrorist acts of the current world
Only time will teach a good lesson to this Andh bhakts ppl . Still ppl are so ignorant not ready to accepts the fact and figure about new law .
Now they have left their slippers there; previously they left their grey cells behind at home if they had any.
seems one of them was working form Home(shaheen bagh) These terrorists should die soon.
