Delhi govt and private hospitals to treat only Delhi residents, says CM Arvind Kejriwal
New Delhi: Delhi borders will be opened for inter-state movement from Monday, and government and private hospitals in Delhi will only treat patients from the national capital, Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal said Sunday in an address through video conference.
He, however, said the hospitals functioning in Delhi under the central government will be open to patients from outside the national capital.
As of Sunday, Delhi had a total of 27,654 confirmed Covid-19 cases, with 761 deaths.
“We are opening Delhi borders from tomorrow. Delhi hospitals will be available for people of Delhi only, while Central hospitals will remain open for all. By the end of June, Delhi would need 15,000 beds,” said Kejriwal.
Kejriwal said over 90 per cent people want Delhi hospitals to treat patients from the national capital during the coronavirus pandemic, adding if people from other cities come to the national capital for specific surgeries, they will be treated at private hospitals.
While Delhi’s borders with Uttar Pradesh and Haryana will be opened from Monday, CM Kejriwal said the malls, restaurants and religious places will be opened in accordance with the Centre’s guidelines.
Kejriwal also announced that hotels and banquet halls will remain closed as the state might need to convert them into hospitals.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The Delhi government has also decided to withdraw the ‘special corona fee’ levied on all categories of liquor, with effect from 10 June, 2020. The Value Added Tax (VAT), however, has been increased on all categories of liquor from 20 per cent to 25 per cent.
The decision was taken at a Cabinet meeting chaired by Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal.
With inputs from PTI and ANI.

Also read: Delhi medical body slams Kejriwal for issuing warning to hospitals amid Covid-19 crisis
 
