Unethical, unreasonable to ignore Ayurveda for Covid treatment & prevention, say researchers
New Delhi: A group of researchers associated with Ministry of AYUSH, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and the University Grants Commission (UGC) have questioned the usage of only “modern medicines” and the “neglect of Ayurveda” for treatment and prevention of Covid-19.
The researchers, in an article published in the Indian Journal of Medical Ethics, have called the neglect of Ayurveda an “ethical issue”.
“The decision not to include evidence from the Indian AYUSH (Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy) systems in the search for solutions and management of Covid-19 seems unreasonable and unfair,” the researchers wrote in the paper titled ‘Ayush, modern medicine and the Covid-19 pandemic’.
The authors of the paper are Sarika Chaturvedi from DY Patil Vidyapeeth, Pune; Nandini Kumar, former deputy director general (senior grade), ICMR, and vice-president, Forum for Ethics Review Committees in India; Girish Tillu from Ayush Centre of Excellence; Sharad Deshpande, former professor and head of the Department of Philosophy, University of Pune; and Bhushan Patwardhan, vice-chairman of the UGC, who is also part of the Ayush Centre of Excellence.
Patwardhan and his team are researching whether Ashwagandha can be an alternate to hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) as a potential preventive medicine for Covid.
Also read: Can Dabur Chyawanprash or panchkosha meditation help with Covid? Unusual trials on in India
“Currently, only modern medicine therapies are used on an empirical basis, however, the same principle is not considered for the use of AYUSH systems. Appropriate use of evidence is required,” the paper states.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“In the ethics context and in the interest of the larger public good, we suggest the inclusion of simple and safe measures from AYUSH systems in the integrative protocols for prophylaxis and treatment of Covid-19.”
Pointing out that Ayurvedic therapies are known for their immunomodulation and rejuvenation properties, which are important in Covid-19 management, the paper says that a refusal to accept empirical evidence in support of the immunomodulatory potential of Ayurvedic rasayana and other AYUSH measures is “neither in the people’s interest nor that of science, besides being unethical”.
“Several in vitro, animal and clinical studies have demonstrated the immunomodulatory effects of the rasayana drugs such as Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera), Guduchi (Tinospora cordifoloia), Amalaki (Emblica officinale) among many others,” the paper adds.
Also read: Heard Charles took Ayurveda treatment: Minister seeks evidence-based AYUSH drugs for Covid-19
The paper also states that patients should be informed about all kinds of treatments available for the disease, including alternate Ayurvedic medicines, and that not giving a choice to patients is “unethical”.
“The person’s preference should be respected by providing all the relevant details about available evidence from the prevalent systems of medicine. Not informing patients of established and available alternatives is unethical,” it says.
Currently in India, no hospital asks patients about their choice of therapy if they are Covid-positive. The protocol is to put patients on allopathic medicines.
The team of researchers says this is unfair, and has also questioned the exclusion of AYUSH in policy formulation.
“The procedural conditions to guarantee fair decisions recommended in public health ethics include transparency, reasonable explanation and openness to revision, in addition to adherence to regulation. On this premise, the decision not to include evidence from the Indian AYUSH systems in the search for solutions and management of Covid-19 seems unreasonable and unfair,” the paper argues.
While the paper raises questions, the Narendra Modi government has been trying to propagate the use of Ayurveda, with the PM himself, in one of his addresses to the nation, urging people to follow an AYUSH ministry advisory that suggested various measures to increase immunity.
Also read: After Modi’s appeal, AYUSH ministry gets over 2,000 proposals to tackle Covid-19 pandemic
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Efficacy of Herbal extract for testing may differ when separated from co enzimes.Most of the herbs are safe with no side effects.Only chemical drugs require testing for all
types of impacts and results.Research over all traditional medicines  are complete and codified already in the ancient texts.Competent qualified traditional prfessionals can handle Ayur or Siddha treatment successfully. It is all proved over the ages.Water can not be blamed for mirage. But mirage also proves existence of water.Not knowing doesn’t substantiate absence of a matter.Discrimination against traditional medicines and Professionals is now playing Havoc.Nation can’t afford to lose precious time or life any more at this critical juncture especially when modern science is short of suitable drugs.
Efficacy of Herbal extract for testing may differ when out of the elemental herb being separated from co enzimes.Most of the herbs are safe with no side effects.Only chemical drugs require testing for all
types of impacts and results.RESEARCH over all traditional medicines  are complete and codified already in the ancient texts.Competent qualified prfessionals can handle successfully.It is all proved over the ages.Water can not be blamed for mirage. But mirage also proves existence of water.Not knowing doesn’t substantiate absence of a matter.Discrimination against traditional medicines and Professionals is now playing Havoc.Nation can’t afford to lose precious time or life any more at this critical juncture especially when modern science is short of suitable drugs.
About 355  allopathic drugs used over the years are now in banned list.Like aspro anacin brufen etc.What is the credibility of their earlier validation.Never is there a single drug as single cure.Prescriptions combine medicines based on case needs. Also support therapy is prescribed.Ayurvedha is time proved.As established systems traditional medicines have crores of following AND registered competent doctors.Patient should be free to choose his cure.Proof of pudding is in eating not in lab.Lives cannot wait for prolonged periods of testing.When unapproved drugs are used Despite WHO s ADVISORY why not safe alternative systems be applied for real cure. Non believers cannot deny the benefits to the believers.
This is misinformation
Ayurveda is time proved only in the sense that astrology is time proved, meaning it isn’t. Simply being in use does not mean it actually works.
With modern medicines, there is actual study of side effects and drugs are removed from market as per research.
Ayurvedic people refuse to do any substantive side effect research claiming they have no side effects, which is false. People have died taking Ayurveda meds and they have not been properly regulated.
When you talk of about believers and non-believers, you are no longer in the land of science or proof, but in blind faith.
Ayurvedha is regulated by now by the centre and states.Hundreds of Government colleges are there. Lakhs of competent registered doctors and crores of followings are there now in India.Please go through Ayush portal.Without results people do not risk health and life.Some people come to Ayurvedha  or Siddha as a last resort and blame for the failures.Steroids and Antibiotics have played havoc in many cases. I myself was a victim of penicillin once. Still every year die due to TB in India despite so called test proven drugs in allopathy. Ancient scientific texts cannot be brushed  aside as mere beliefs. Indian astronomy is proved by the Almanac where many events are forecast centuries ahead and occur in our own days. Astrology is part of our Astronomy.The science cannot be blamed for misinterpretations and wrong applications.It will not be fully successful for material life.Quacks exist in every field including IT.It’s the order of the day to reject anything Indian.Modern science is good and beneficial but has limitations.Traditional science is equally superior
Ayurvedha and Siddha  are by now regulated  by both the centre and states. Hundreds of Government colleges are there. Lakhs of competent registered doctors and crores of followings prevail. Please go through Ayush portal. Without results people do not risk health and life. Some people come to Ayurvedha  or Siddha as a last resort and blame for the failures. Steroids and Antibiotics have played havoc in many cases. I myself was a victim of penicillin once. Still every year die due to TB in India despite so called test proven drugs in allopathy. Ancient scientific texts cannot be brushed  aside as mere wrong beliefs. Likewise Indian astronomy is proved by the Almanac where many events are forecast centuries ahead and occur in our own days. Astrology is part of our Astronomy. The science cannot be blamed for misinterpretations and wrong applications. Predictions will not be fully successful for material purposes. Quacks exist in every field including IT. It’s the order of the day to reject anything Indian. Modern science is good and beneficial but has limitations. Traditional science is equally superior. Nothing should be thrusted upon.
I am requesting  govt to tackle covid positive pt by ayush doctor in Ayush hospital then we will prove  ayush is ethical scientific
Print, your title should be: AYUSH researchers call for Ayurveda to be used.
