SpiceJet offers to fly migrants stuck in lockdown from Delhi, Mumbai to Patna
New Delhi: SpiceJet has offered services of its aircraft and crew members to the government for any humanitarian mission during the 21-day lockdown and the airline is ready to operate some flights from Delhi and Mumbai to Patna to alleviate the suffering of migrant workers, especially those from Bihar, its CMD Ajay Singh said on Friday.
While domestic and international passenger flights have been banned till April 14 midnight, IndiGo and GoAir have also offered their aircraft and crew and staff members to the government for any mission required to contain the spread of coronavirus.
“We have offered our aircraft and crew for any humanitarian mission that the government needs us to fly. We are already flying food, medicines and medical equipment for government every day (on our freighter aircraft),” Singh told PTI.
“We would like to alleviate the suffering of the migrant workers, especially those from Bihar, by flying some flights between Delhi/Mumbai and Patna,” he added.
India has imposed a 21-day lockdown, which came into force on Wednesday, to check the spread of the virus which has claimed at least 17 lives and infected over 700 people so far.
Currently, while there is a ban on international and domestic passenger flights in the country, all-cargo flights and flights specifically approved by the DGCA can operate as usual, according to the aviation regulator.
Also read: ‘Easier to survive in village’ — it’s a long journey home for Delhi labourers with no work
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
SpiceJet has five B737 freighter aircraft in its fleet and they are operating normally. However, the airline’s entire commercial passenger aircraft fleet of 82 Boeing 737, two Airbus A320 and 32 Bombardier Q-400s is currently grounded.
The Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) is yet to give permission to airlines to conduct flights using their commercial passenger aircraft with just cargo in their belly.
Singh said, “SpiceJet operated a special charter flight from Delhi to Coimbatore today on government’s request. This flight was operated at a very short notice and carried a Hazmat suit. This will help local authorities replicate and start local manufacturing.”
The special charter flight did not carry any cargo except the Hazmat suit, he added.
“We will do as much as we can to help our government and fellow citizens in the fight to defeat coronavirus,” he said.
IndiGo on Wednesday said that it has offered the Union civil aviation ministry its “resources, aircraft and crew” to transport medicine, equipment and relief material from one part of the country to another.
GoAir said on Friday that it has offered government its aircraft, crew and airport staff to carry out emergency services and repatriation of citizens.
Also read:How lockdown is disrupting the village economy in UP, one farmer at a time
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Plzz mughe Surat se HYD Jana h argent, mere PTI vhan akele  h. Mughe hyd Jana jruri h plzzzz help
I am Sital Ahire wanted to travel from Mumbai to Bangalore to my home with my three kids  I have got stuck in Mumbai please I want to travel soon as possible as lockdown over  a lady with 3 kids staying alone in Mumbai feeling depressed a single day is going like a pain
I am stuck in Mumbai and my mom is all over alone in Punjab(Jalandhar) please help because both of us are coming under depression.
I m sucked here in Mumbai with my two kids n father.Please help,I live in Delhi n now it has become very difficult for us to survive here in Mumbai.Please help
Pls help me ..m pregnant far from my husband..he stay in new delhi nd m at siliguri…I m with my 5 years old daughter..we r stuck here..pls pls kindly help us to reach our home new delhi..make some arrangements for flight.. thank you..kindly help
We request to Government and aircraft members you are continue lock down to save our nation but you also take step to reach  native those stuck in lock down throughout india
Sir my name is Mehraj Ahmad Lone son  of Manzoor Ahmad Lone.Two months before we came in Tata Memorial hospital,actually my father is multiple myeloma patient due to corona virus doctors say to go back home.Now stuck in Mumbai.The patient is having severe pain please help us to reach the home our contact number is 9541068557
Sir I am from Bihar and I work in  star interprises electrical company so I want to go to home bicause my parents are very sad for me for very dangerous situations so please arrange service. My contact number is 754188214.
We  a group of 6 people of same family  including 2.5 yrs baby and a 65 yrs woman are locked in Jammu . Both our train and flight tickets are cancelled . Please 🙏Please arrange a flight to Kolkata from Jammu.
Koi toh madad  ko tayr hojao ,modi ,amit shah sbko saanp sungh gya h ,yeh yaad rkhna agli sarkar aapki nhi hone wali h ,vote hum log hi dete h
Plz arrange flight from surat to kolkata my wife is in surat and she need to come back. Plz contact 8420787524
6290462547
Sir, please arrange flight from Hyderabad to Delhi….my husband stucked in Hyderabad…lock down was implemented without any prior intimation…so many people have stucked, struggle to be with family.. kindly arrange flights for atleast one day….
South INDIANS are also part of INDIA and paying TAXES.
I believe without doubt peoples & concerned will be accepted.
My husband and my son live in dadar Near Siddhi Vinayak temple  they are stucked in my husband friends house we live in Hyderabad ,he is a key maker we live on daily basis  right now we do not have any source can you people send them to Hyderabad
Emergency 
I’m stuck in Delhi NCR, My wife has seizure operation before 20 days and now her problem increased.
Request to start flight from Delhi to Nagpur.
With all Safety compliance.
9823457956
I think collect all people who stuck plan accordingly.
Sir,  my name is Himanshu Kumar and i stuck in vyara, Tapi district. My native village is in bihar. If there is any arrangement for to go my native village please let me know on my no – 7046085683
Sir I am in Coimbatore Tamil Nadu so please kindly arrange the flight from Coimbatore to patna we are many people in Coimbatore so please help us…..
Please arrange flight from Kannur to Punjab…
Sir,I am in Bangalore near kempegowda bus terminal I stucked here.sir i am here for job but till i didn’t get and i am jobless and also have not much money to survive if date of national lockdown extended from 14 April. After arrival at patna, I will continue my self quarantine for more 14 days in my home town or at my home.i know at this time for our country lockdown is very important but whenever my mother talking to me crying all time for me after all she is patient serviving on regular  medicine that’s why I worry about. Please kindly arrange flights from Bangalore to patna
Kinldy requested ,Pls arrange a flight from kolkatta to Ahmedabad
My native is in Ahmedabad
I am stuck in kolkatta, my wife and a 6 year son is alone in Ahmedabad. I have came here for some work on 17th March and got stuck here.
Pls help.🙏🙏🙏🙏🙏
Contact number: 7600448681
I am also stuck in New Delhi in paharganj. Pls arrange a flight from Delhi to Guwahati me and my family were suffering this lock down situation  from 9days.   The Humble request to our Honourable PM to help us to go back home… Pls share this so that we can see our family members sooN
Kindly help, me and brother stuck in Mumbai and we don’t have enough money to stay. Please help
Kindly help… Me & my friend lives in delhi and we are stuck in Mumbai. We going in depression as we have not enough cash to survive in Mumbai anymore. Mumbai is expensive and everything here on double the prices, it’s better and important for us to go back Delhi. Our home town  is Delhi.
Please arrange take us home.
Kindly contact: 9210429147
I am stuck in Varanasi from 23/03/20 and my Wife & Children are at Mumbai.
Please let me know if there is any flight for Mumbai
Please arrange flight from mumbai to kolkata.Me and my friends are now in mumbai we are going to our home in west bengal. Please contact 7208610155
We are stuck in Indore from past 7 days. We are three friends and we are from bihar.
Please can you arrange for us flights from Indore to patna. It will be a great help.
I am sabu kesavsn now I struck in bihar gaya city  age  52 years and me also suffering from diabetic and liver problems. My native plane in kersla now My family staying in Assam guwahaty and my wife also patients ear balancing problems without third person she not walk in out side. So pl help me only one day start flight from gaya to guwahaty other wise patna to guwahaty. So pl help
Please thode din our sabar karlo yaaro..tum ghar jaavoge toh gharwalonko Corona viruses spread ho saktaa hai… please thode se takleef sehlo yaaro…
I am from Assam, Now I am located with my family in chennai Please arrange a flight for Chennai to guwahati, as soon as possible for you, sir.
Reply
My Abhinash Kumar Keral mein fasa hua Hun Main Bhi Bihar jana Chahta Hun Yahan Se Bhi aeroplane Ki vyavastha Bhi Ja
I m  in hyderabad and my father mother or family in varansi utter pradesh
I want also go varansi .
I request u please arrange flight hyderabad to Varansi please
Pls let me know , about is that service operated between ahamdabad to Mumbai , my sister is sticked in Ahmedabad from lat 4 days, she don’t have any relative or any known person , now she is residing in owner flat where she is working , and from last 5 days she  couldn come in Mumbai, so kindly request to pls inform if any facility or service is there to bring her in Mumbai from ahemdabad
Very good step.Many students are stuck in bangalore.  My son is stuck in bangalore and wants to come to jorhat, assam. Please arrange a flight. Ph no -8486183545
Would  u provide the flight  from Delhi to Hyderabad.because, we stucked  in noida  around 20 members of Telangana people .we are working in noida
We 3 members also strucked in delhi. Need help to travel to hyderabad. Plz contact 9502504123 shashi for any information.
Sir,I am a student in Bangalore I stucked here ..can I know any flights are available for us?kindly arrange flights from Bangalore to patna
Please arrange the flight from Belgaum to delhi , there r lot of migrants ate stuck there please help him
Afcourse time was not enough for migrants to reach to there hometowns and this is not Europe where there are not these many poor labourers, here in India these labourers are from states,  who could not give jobs to their own people and enjoying politics and state resources. Now these states must be learning lesson to create job within so that Poor’s don’t need to go out of state for work. Yogi Adityanath is giving his best and doing a good job like Delhi CM , telangana CM
Afcourse time was not enough for migrants to reach to there hometowns and this is not Europe where there are not these many poor labourers, here in India these labourers are from stares like bihar,  who could not give jobs to their own people and enjoying politics and state resources. Now these states must be learning lesson to create job within so that Poor’s don’t need to go out of state for work. Yogi Adityanath is giving his best and doing a good job like Delhi CM , telangana CM
What about the peoples stocks in patna who are from Kolkata………plz help us also there will numerous amount of people
Please arrange some flights from Mumbai to Patna. Because many peoples are stuck here in mumbai due to the 21 days lockdown.
pls help us we are stuck in delhi
we r from kashmir..Pls arrange a flight from delhi to srinagar
*Lakhs of people stuck all over the country. Poor Migrants stuck on roads without food and water all over the country.
*Creation of such crowds on the roads, itself  will defeat the concept of social distancing and will give scope for spread of virus.
*The problem s of genuine travellers for medical issues, joining with other family members for want of food, money etc to be addressed.
* Limited mobility may be allowed in genuine cases by way of train, flights, taxis
I have from Navodaya Vidyalaya who have declared summer vacation from 1 April i am in Guwahati and want to travel delhi how can i travel please provide any means of communication so that i can reach at my home
I am from malda, wb. Now I am located with my family  in haridwar uttarakhand. Please arrange a flight for Delhi to Kolkata or bagdogra, as soon as possible for you, sir.
I am one among the quarantined persons in Delhi,SGT Hospital from 22/03/2020 on the way to Chennai from Las Vegas, USA. We are hopeful of release by 4th April 2020. But no sign of release even after 14 Days. I am coming along with my family. I have been seeing many people arrived from different countries being quarantined along with us. How to reach Chennai? Whether my tickets in Air India are cancelled or not? There are about 30 people to travel Chennai. What is position of ours? Any development in the near future may be known to me/us. Thanks
Very good step Airlines companies
Salute to all of you
In this Covid 19 panic time we have to cooperate each other
Thanks
बिहार  मजदूर को विमान की सुविधा कब दे रहे है मै कैसे जानुगी  फोन नंबर बताए गोमती नगर लखनऊ मेरे पति  फंसे हुए है नाम दीपक कुमार नम्बर 9643591788 कृपया सम्पर्क करे पता गोमती नगर लखनऊ चारबाग
Student studying in Vadodara,gujarat are stuck here still.we booked ticket for march 26 but we were late.Around 24 students from manipur studying in M.S University Vadodara and there may be too many apart from mine.So please arrange a flight to Imphal
I also stuck in mumbai my indigo flight got cancelled from mumbai to Baroda dated 24th march 18:20 due to technical reasons . My family is in baroda. My wife is sick and me also under depression. Please help. I want to reach baroda.
I don’t think taking anybody anywhere will be helpful. If they really want to help, rather than spending on the extremely expensive fuel, just let them stay in your aircraft. It might sound impractical, but they are migrating just because they don’t have homes, or food. Better give them that, temporarily, if you can… because either way if they travel from one place to another, they might be carrying the disease with themselves, threat for others as well. Please.
Correctly said singh ji.
Modi Ji we are stuck in Delhi want to go to madhubani We Dont have anything
 To Eat Facing a Lot problem We are three Mwmber 
Kindly Send us Back to OuR Village🙏
Madhubani is worst for corona.stay in delhi.stay safe
We also stuck in tamilnadu Vellore cmc hospital area
Please arrange flight from ahmedabad to delhi..Lot of people are stuck away from the families who belong to noida and delhi
Stay where you are.
I am Dr. Ravindra Mishra , General Manager of a Infrastructure company constructing the largest, longest and historical bridge of Jammu & Kashmir.
We are taking care of my team as good as before ( onset of Corona virus), by providing fresh Rations, Essential commodities and Milk.
Our flock comprises of 182 workers, Engineers, Managers , Operators etc mainly from U. P.. Bihar and West Bengal.
Notwithstanding my best efforts, the workers are restless since last 02 days and not prepared to stay any longer.
Can someone guide me a way out for demobilising these workers , to their native place. I am already in contact with The Divisional Commissioner , The Distt Magistrate and all concerned.
Regards,
Dr. Ravindra Mishra
They have to stay there and move after August only. If they are restless push them onto the river. J& k is an infected area.we cant afford to have people from there coming down and spreading the virus. Give them 2 options:- munch on the fresh rations or being pushed from the river.
Very good to see that all private carriers had come forward to help nation againts corona virus not only ……….
I am in mumbai my father is I’ll in Delhi, I want to meet him may be last time
It’s people like u who are killing hundreds of others. See last time over video call or your last time already over.
Kindley request pls arrange a flights from mumbai to patna… I came here first time to do work…but don’t have enough money…..I request u pls helm me….🙏🙏🙏🇮🇳🇮🇳.
Pls help me my  family problem…..
Contact no..9304496844,6203866015…
Please arrange flight from chennai to guwahati,,,many patient from CMC Vellore stuck in vellore and could not go to their home.
Please arrange flight from Bangalore to Jharsuguda via Hyderabad or Raipur. from a last week just struck in room in this lockdown period without food and money I can’t survive. 
Help me …..9040168684
Modi messed everything without plan, others are following him without any planning…..?????
