FICCI launches online course on coronavirus management to help ‘if situation gets worse’
New Delhi: The Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) has launched an online certificate course on the coronavirus, which it hopes will provide a workforce if the situation deteriorates in the country. 
The course officially titled ‘COVID-19 Certificate on Awareness and Management’, is open to even those without a science background and deals with awareness and management of the outbreak.
FICCI has launched the course in association with Medvarsity, an online medical certification and training platform.
FICCI along with Medvarsity is organizing free certificate course on #Covid_19 Awareness & Management. For information, visit https://t.co/QgDD0XU85F.#StopThePanic#IndiaFightsCOVID19 pic.twitter.com/cKByxNLhxF
— FICCI (@ficci_india) March 17, 2020

 
According to the Medvarsity website, as many as 20,318 students have so far enrolled for the online course. 
“If the situation gets worse, there will be a requirement for a lot of trained manpower and in the future the government can hire those who know more about it,” a FICCI official told ThePrint. 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The course material also contains videos related to clinical presentation, treatment of COVID-19 that develops due to coronavirus infection, prevention of a corona outbreak and case management. It also contains a PDF file with information on the dos and don’ts in the case of an outbreak in a region. 
According to latest available information, COVID-19 is currently in the Stage Two phase in India, and according to officials at the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), there has been no community transmission yet. 
The total cases in the country has risen to 172, with three deaths. 
Also read: Why healthcare workers are more at risk from COVID-19 and how hospitals are protecting them
The course has nine modules and anyone with a social media account and can access and complete them. 
There are no fees and there is no per-determined time limit to complete the course.  
Apart from the nine modules, the course also has eight videos, a PDF file, an online quiz and a file associated with assessment of the participant. The videos are meant to help explain aspects such as an introduction about the coronavirus, its composition and how it spreads.
There is no practical training associated with the course. At the end of the course, every student will be given a certificate along with feedback. 
“The course has no fixed time schedule. There are nine modules and it is up to you to finish them as soon as possible,” the FICCI official quoted above said. 
FICCI has launched this course in association with the Medvarsity, which claims on its website that it is the first and largest institution in India to conduct online medical certifications. 
Also read: Bengal’s first COVID-19 patient evaded test for 2 days while IAS mother met top officials
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
I am intrested
I AM WILLING TO JOIN AND COMPLETE THIS COURSE PLZZ HELP OUT IT
Quiz competition
Interested
Please note, i am intrested
Nice
Nice
Yes I m interested to learn and help people to know more obit that so please send me the link
I am interested details plz
Interested , please send details
Interested
Quiz
Interested… Send details
I am intersted
Yes, I am very much interested to know about this pandemic.
I am interested.
Interested
I m interested
interested plz send details
interested plz send the details
interested
I am interested in course
Interested send
Interested
Interested. Please send  details
I an interested and want to do this corona awareness course
I’m interested send the details
Please give me details
Yes  Interested, pls send me  details
Interested, pls send details
I m intrested
Im interested kindly send me details
Interested
Yes I am interested.plz forward me further details.
I am interested
Plz follow govt instructions and stay at home
Interested send details
Interested
