Will be a long fight against Covid-19, we can’t be tired, can’t lose — PM tells BJP workers
New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi Monday asked BJP workers to “be prepared” for a long fight against the coronavirus pandemic.
Addressing his party workers on the occasion of the 40th Foundation Day of the Bharatiya Janata Party, Modi said: “Na thakna hai, na haarna hai, lambi ladai ke bawajood bhi jeetna hai (We can neither get tired, nor lose. Despite the long fight, we have to win).”
The PM said it is an extraordinary foundation day for the party as the entire country and the world is facing an unprecedented crisis.
“The entire country has one mission — to win the fight against coronavirus,” he added.
Asking his partymen to contribute generously to tackle the pandemic, the PM said: “Our mothers and sisters gave their jewellery during wars in the past. The current situation is in no means less than a war. It is a war to save the humanity. I appeal to every BJP worker to contribute to PM-CARES fund and motivate 40 others to do the same.”
Even as he asked his party workers and citizens to be prepared for the long battle against Covid-19, Modi congratulated Indians by saying: “The maturity, shown by 130 crore people of India, is unprecedented. Nobody could have believed that people of this country will show such discipline.
“Yesterday (Sunday), we got a glimpse of the sense of unity displayed by the people of the country,” he said, referring to the lighting of diyas and candles.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: India isn’t on top of list for coronavirus test kits suppliers
The prime minister again reminded the citizens about following social distancing norms to contain the spread of the virus. 
“Whenever you walk out, make sure you use a face cover and practise social distancing and the right preventive discipline.” 
“I expect every BJP worker will keep himself, his family and his society safe. With this emotion, we must walk towards victory,” he said. 
The prime minister further urged the party workers to pay respect to the lakhs of doctors, nurses, safai karmacharis (sanitation workers), police officers and other government employees, who are working tirelessly during this outbreak.
“We must thank all of them for facing risks during this period,” he said. 
Also read: This is how my team isolated the new coronavirus to fight the global pandemic
 
