Despite highest COVID-19 cases in subcontinent, Pakistan yet to contribute to SAARC Fund
New Delhi: More than a week since Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced the creation of a SAARC (South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation) Emergency Response Fund for COVID-19, Pakistan is the only country that has not yet committed any contribution.
Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi is believed to have called a few of the SAARC leaders such as the Sri Lankan Foreign Minister to understand the operation of the fund and the contribution that each country has made, diplomatic sources told ThePrint.
The latest ones to contribute to the fund were Sri Lanka and Bangladesh, who have put in $5 million and $1.5 million each respectively.
“Sincerely thank President of Sri Lanka @GotabayaR for contributing $ 5 million to the SAARC COVID-19 Emergency Fund. Our cooperation will go a long way in fighting this disease effectively,” tweeted Prime Minister Modi.
Sincerely thank President of Sri Lanka @GotabayaR for contributing $ 5 million to the SAARC COVID-19 Emergency Fund.  Our cooperation will go a long way in fighting this disease effectively.
— Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 23, 2020

 
In a separate tweet thanking Bangladesh Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina for its contribution to the fund, Prime Minister Modi said, “we will overcome the challenges posed by COVID-19.”
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Grateful to Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina of Bangladesh for announcing  $ 1.5 million as contribution to the COVID-19 Emergency Fund.  Through our solidarity and working together, we will overcome challenges posed by COVID-19.
— Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 23, 2020

Last Saturday, Afghanistan and the Maldives pledged $1 million and $200,000 respectively.
On Friday, Nepal and Bhutan announced their contribution of $831,393.45 and $100,000 respectively.
India had already promised a corpus of $10 million when the initiative was announced, with the option of contributing more if needed, in any effort to fight the spread of the deadly coronavirus together as one block.
Also read: After Nepal, Bhutan, now Afghanistan & Maldives pledge support to SAARC COVID-19 fund
According to sources, Pakistan has not yet given any reason why it has been unable to contribute money to the fund. This comes even as Pakistan is to assume the responsibility of being the next chair of SAARC. At present it is Nepal.
The process of Pakistan becoming the chair of SAARC could not take place due to rising tensions between New Delhi and Islamabad even as the Modi government refused to be part of the SAARC framework after the September 2016 Uri attacks.
Pakistan is already seeing the highest number of COVID-19 cases in the subcontinent with 646 patients and three deaths, as of 23 March. India, on the other hand, has witnessed the highest number of deaths with seven people losing their lives.
Total number of COVID-19 cases in the SAARC region stands at 1,196 with 12 total deaths. Out of the eight-member countries, there have been deaths only in India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.
When PM Modi announced the fund he had said, “any of us (SAARC countries) can use the fund to meet the cost of immediate actions.” The coordination of the fund is being monitored by the respective Foreign Secretaries.
The SAARC Emergency Response Fund for COVID-19 was announced during a video-conference on 15 March that was held among seven leaders, out of the eight-member grouping. Pakistan was represented by Prime Minister Imran Khan’s special advisor on national health services Zafar Mirza.
Also read: Why Pakistan is the most chilled out in a world hit by coronavirus
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
