Rajasthan doctor tweets picture of IAS officer wearing full PPE, medical staff in just masks
New Delhi: At a time when doctors across the country are facing shortages of protective gear required when treating patients infected with Covid-19, a Rajasthan-based doctor has highlighted how a district collector was seen wearing full personal protective equipment (PPE), while medical staff standing next to him had none.
A picture tweeted by the doctor, Pankaj Meena Khoker, has gone viral. The picture was accompanied by a short message: “When an IAS officer wears a full PPE kit and doctors wear normal clothes and mask……I don’t think Modi’s promise is working here.”
When an IAS officer wears a full PPE kit and doctors wear normal clothes and mask……I don’t think Modi’s promise is working here #uglyindianbureaucracy@PMOIndia @narendramodi @drharshvardhan @DrHarjitBhatti @drpankajsolanki @UnitedRda @FordaIndia @RajCMO @CMODelhi pic.twitter.com/UqojffI5oF
— Pankaj Meena Khoker (@dr_pankajmeena) April 3, 2020
The picture seems to be from Indore in neighbouring Madhya Pradesh, as written on the wall behind the IAS officer in the picture.
The tweet comes at a time when over 50 healthcare professionals — including doctors, nurses, and other paramedical staff — in India have tested positive for Covid-19.
In a nationwide survey conducted by the central government in late March, IAS officers from across districts too had highlighted the shortage of medical and protective equipment needed to battle the deadly pandemic.
Also read: What is PPE, and why it is essential in the fight against coronavirus
The doctor’s tweet has generated a debate on whether IAS officers can be classified as an ‘essential service’ and need the protective gear, or should the protection of doctors be prioritised.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
only because the image you shared is from Indore,MP. I agree we should be the first ones but please don't undermine others who are part of essential services. https://t.co/XebKSKWqgj
— That_Medic (@drMedicOnCall) April 4, 2020

 
That is the said situation in our country, here’s administration and politicians gets upper hand,and that resulted in the current situation in across the state. Our current poor health care system is due to such type of people’s.
— Dr.JEEVEN SINGH (@drjeeveniihmr11) April 3, 2020
According to some reports, there has been a sense of alarm among Indian healthcare professionals, with doctors maintaining that there is a shortage of PPE in India.
Earlier in March, the World Health Organization warned that “severe and mounting disruption to the global supply of personal protective equipment (PPE) — caused by rising demand, panic buying, hoarding and misuse — is putting lives at risk from the new coronavirus and other infectious diseases”.
“Healthcare workers rely on personal protective equipment to protect themselves and their patients from being infected and infecting others,” WHO had said.
“But shortages are leaving doctors, nurses and other frontline workers dangerously ill-equipped to care for Covid-19 patients, due to limited access to supplies such as gloves, medical masks, respirators, goggles, face shields, gowns, and aprons,” it added.
Also read: Govt wants report on PPE, ventilator, test kit stock, asks states, UTs to reply by 5 April
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
These corrupt officer who think of their own should be removed from their position . In this  time where doctors are struggling to get the minimum facilities so that they can treat patients, these fat headed people are still misusing the resources .How can these people who kept licking the feets of politicians whole life till retirement  can be given so much importance and piwer . Because of these slow working people ,every process in India get slowed down . These paper pushing people will never understand their role . And how even they can who studied politics and history for whole life can understand the science   . For them misuse of power is seen as a pride.
On one hand where doctors are losing their life while fighting as frontline warrior these are still not supporting them.
Bureaucracy should be more transparent .
These bureaucratic robot once established by britisher to squeeze blood of innocent Indian are still working to do same.
Indian got independence from britisher but can’t able to remove their illegitimate birth.
This is not a new thing. These corrupt officer who think of their own should be removed from their position . In this  time where doctors are struggling to get the minimum facilities so that they can treat patients, these fat headed people are still misusing the resources .How can these people who kept licking the lof politicians whole life till retirement  can be given so much importance and piwer . Because of these slow working people ,every process in India get slowed down . These paper pushing people will never understand their role . And how even they can who studied politics and history for whole life can understand the science   . For them misuse of power is seen as a pride.
On one hand where doctors are losing their life while fighting as frontline warrior these are still not supporting them.
Bureaucracy should be more transparent .
These bureaucratic robot once established by britisher to squeeze blood of innocent Indian are still working to do same.
Indian got independence from britisher but can’t able to remove their illegitimate birth.
We have to provide ppe to all front line staff compoulsorily. No negotiations in this. IAS wearing ppe can not questioned.
Is doctor seeing infected patient directly or IAS. Doctors should have kits
It is simple that some elements who are dead brains are making fun of our govt. If you ask them have they done anything for our country and it’s citizens!
I am sure they will look blank, and then their heads will start spinning!!!   Good for nothing nerds!
IAS has  become punching bag for the unsuccessful, inefficient and corrupt who envy their powers but are not ready to work hard like them at all
Those who fail in UPSC make it their profession to curse IAS and the sacrifices that they make at personal, professional and financial levels.
