Will more people turn to vegetarianism in a post-coronavirus world?
Ever since the Covid-19 outbreak, people across the world have sought to link the coronavirus to non-vegetarian diets. Queen guitarist Brian May said this pandemic came from “people eating animals”. In India, Haryana health minister Anil Vij urged people to become vegetarian. AIIMS Director Dr Randeep Guleria has clarified that non-vegetarian food doesn’t cause the infection.
ThePrint asks: Will more people turn to vegetarianism in a post-coronavirus world?
Neera Majumdar
Senior copy editor, ThePrint
If you want to stop eating non-vegetarian food, do it for the right reasons — you want to do your bit to fight climate change, you care about animals, you care about your health indicators. Don’t do it because it’s the only lesson you took away from the coronavirus crisis.
As soon as the first few people tested positive for Covid-19 in India, #NoMeatNoCoronavirus started trending on Twitter. Indians commented about how the virus was the ‘wrath of god’ for eating meat, how it was a ‘punishment’ for meat-eating China. Rumours started doing the rounds on how vegetarians don’t get infected. A post on social media went viral (the irony) that claimed the WHO has said no vegetarian in the world has been infected by coronavirus. It was fake news of course, but it pointed to one truth — Indians see vegetarianism more as a good virtue rather than a life choice. Meat is associated with impurity, pollution, certain religions and of course, paap.
The coronavirus outbreak started in China because of unhygienic conditions, illegal wildlife trading and packed markets. It could have started anywhere in the world. Eating poultry or not eating it, will not save you. Eating right, eating clean, will.
Unnati Sharma
Journalist, ThePrint
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Coronavirus will change a lot of things. Once the pandemic is over, nothing is going to be the same, including our food habits. Scientists say it is likely that the coronavirus came from bats. Although food safety experts have clarified that the coronavirus is not caused by eating meat, the way this virus has shaken our world, it is not easy to convince people.
The virus has already given rise to social stigmatisation to an extent that RWAs are turning into a nightmare and doctors are being attacked. Now when there are reports and conversations around how wet markets in China’s Wuhan and bats are possibly responsible for all the mess, it is likely that a lot of people would turn their back on meat. Remember how quickly the world adapted to ‘Namaste’ instead of shaking hands.
Personally, coronavirus or no coronavirus, I believe that turning vegetarian is a good practice. Vegetarianism is economical, environment-friendly and against cruelty to animals. Think about all the use of antibiotics in animals and making them prey to fulfill our food needs while breaking away the food chain. Even if people do not turn vegetarians to save the lives of the animals, I think this pandemic could be a beginning towards that path since it affects our lives.
Kritika Sharma
Special Correspondent
Whenever the world comes out of the ongoing coronavirus crisis, one thing is for sure — people’s attitude towards many things will change and one of them will be food. Among the several theories about the coronavirus that spreads the Covid-19 disease, the most agreed upon by scientists across the world is that pangolins served as the “intermediate host” andpassed on the virus from bats to humans. The origin lies in China’s wet markets in Wuhan that sell all kinds of exotic animals for consumption.
Whether the virus actually originated in Wuhan wet markets or not, this theory is sure to have an impact on the way people eat. This is bound to make people more careful and move towards a vegetarian diet. However, chances of people turning vegetarian are still far-fetched, specially in India.
Besides, diseases like Swine Flu that have caused a threat to the existence of humankind in the past also originated from animals, which gives more weight to the argument that people might turn vegetarian in a post-coronavirus world. Having said that, there is no direct connection to being a meat eater and getting any disease, it’s all about perception at the end of the day.
Kairvy Grewal
Journalist, ThePrint
I don’t think that the coronavirus outbreak is going to change my meat-eating habits. They say that distance makes the heart grow fonder. One of the first things I’m going to do when this crisisis over is devour those hot chicken wings from Nando’s.
At the same time, I will be slightly more cautious about the quality of restaurants I dine at. I imagine it will take other meat-eaters some more time to finally trust that roadside kebab again. However, my hesitation will not be able to keep me away from meat for long.
Sentiments aside, there have been no studies so far that conclusively prove that eating meat is responsible for the outbreak of coronavirus. Indulging in the myth of meat-eaters causing coronavirus is the classic moral high ground vegetarians like to take. I believe that these myths and rumours are just getting started. Just like the number of cases of xenophobia increasingwith the number of coronavirus cases across the globe.
Giving into rumours to hold a seemingly unrelated habit accountable for a global pandemic should merely be seen as a futile attempt at making sense of things during unprecedented times.
Also read: In coronavirus crisis, are RWAs helping or becoming vigilantes?
By Pia Krishnankutty, journalist at ThePrint
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
I think we should not write blogs without  thinking about other disease spread thorught animals .
75% disease in humans come from animals .
It is called Zoonosis
https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&source=web&rct=j&url=https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zoonosis&ved=2ahUKEwj04Ju0-ajqAhWDbn0KHerKDK0QFjACegQIAhAB&usg=AOvVaw2S32j0hQWSCQJWXQQxXfFj
Just imagine yourselves in the position of an animal raised in a crowded farm about to be butchered and its pain. I can and I shudder everytime thinking of the trauma and pain they go through. Definitely not taking any high ground but surely believe that empathy makes us human. If we cannot empathize with animals, even if we do empathize with fellow human beings, its just a pretence.
Veg or nonVeg.The Question lies what is better. Forget covid 19 & look at other perceptions.Climate change main cause Animal killings, livestock,Cruelty,Unhygienic eating nonveg. As we humans after death are burned or put inside an grave within 12 To 24 hrs of Death.How than Animals killed can be eaten even after 2to4 days of killing.Cold storage was never an fully hygienic solution.
In India & other countries, people buy nonveg foods even though they are not stored in cold storage.Think about the millions of bacteria  and viruses you invite by eating such products.
Just Think,when our own beloved person is put in Graves or burnt within 12to14 hrs due to bacteria,Diseases,infections,viruses etc reaching the dead body.,The same applies with Animals it is logical nonveg is not good.we humans are not made to eat nonveg,Just draw your sense & Think.It is mostly said a nonveg eater gets fat & builts muscle,but even the dead body gets fat if not burned or put in the grave.It is the bacteria,disease which gets you fat & help you reduce your Immunity.hope we understand.
Occasionally, these days receives post in social media by animal rights group pushing their agenda. Holier than thou attitude will not only go unnoticed, but some people may embrace it. Humans are omnivores – those who go vegan are in fact far more likely to wind up with actual malnutrition issues.  They are nothing but loonies with protein deficiency. It scares me they can force their thinking on their kids below three years of age. It can hinder their mental development for life! You can’t magically wish away millions of years of evolution. God gave us molars to eat meat. Just keeping Him happy. I did not climb to the top of the food chain to eat carrots!!!!! Besides if we’re not supposed to eat animals,,, then WHY are they made out of Meat???
