Shut bars don’t mean you start throwing house parties, and being host to coronavirus
Today is a truly momentous day. It can either be viewed as a drill for more serious curfews that await us in the near future, or just an unnecessary, elaborate PR exercise. Whatever you think it is, the lesson one must take home from this self-isolating, self-imposed ‘janata curfew’ is to stay indoors.
The shutdown of bars, restaurants and pubs in your city should in no way lead to fun parties or ‘corona parties’ at your house. Some totally unfazed Germans with ‘I am never gonna die’ attitude did host such parties. It did nothing but helped the virus spread.
The term ‘corona parties’ was coined by the German media after many of the young, carefree Germans continued to step out, enjoying spring, completely disobeying government directives to maintain social distancing. Germany is the third-most impacted country in Europe with coronavirus, but shut schools, colleges and offices have become a reason for throwing techno parties in public parks.
Last Thursday, videos of spring breakers partying in Florida, US — probably damming themselves at the same time — showed many youngsters, who formed a dense crowd, having the time of their lives. If you know anything about spring break gatherings, you’re probably aware of all that goes on at such meets.
All over the world people have met for ‘lock down parties’ and ‘end of the world’ drinking sessions. Indulging in such reckless revelry is exactly the kind of behaviour based on which boomers paint our generation as senseless.
Young people are just as likely to get infected by coronavirus as the old, even if they remain asymptomatic at best. It’s important to remember that even if you don’t contract the disease, you still very well may be a carrier.
As India braces to enter the third stage of coronavirus pandemic, youth will play a pivotal role in containing the infection and it’s essential that all of us act more responsibly.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: On science of Covid-19 — drugs, threat to diabetics and why it’s killing more Italians
More than putting yourself at risk, think about the safety of others if you continue to go about your daily party scenes, like it’s no big deal. As is being advised, it’s better to panic now than to regret later.
If you think that shutting down malls, schools, temples, public places, offices, monuments, or an entire city, etc. is ‘over reacting’, then I won’t be surprised if you come out as a flat earther or climate change denier too.
Teens partying in Germany or those gallivanting at a spring break in the US have acted nothing less than bio hazards, probably infecting hundreds of people. We have similar examples back home: be it singer Kanika Kapoor of baby doll fame, who hid her travel history to escape quarantine or the six people who evaded quarantine from a government hospital in Delhi.
Also read: With COVID-19 cases rising, India to now test all ‘high-risk’ contacts of patients
Not everyone we come in contact with are young and healthy. Some could be diabetic, heart patients, and elderly, who might never recover from the disease once infected, something we must keep in mind before stepping out.
If you are one of those who avoids public places, but goes to a friend’s place, or works from home while chugging beers, then you should know the infamous case of Typhoid Mary. Mary Mallon infected at least 51 people, killing 3 of Typhoid fever in the US way back in 1906. She too was asymptomatic.
