‘Listen to experts, ignore morons’ — Schwarzenegger for social distancing to beat COVID-19
New Delhi: Hollywood star and former California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger Monday posted a video on Twitter urging social distancing and self-isolation amid the coronavirus pandemic. 
The video, which notched over 3 million views within hours, shows Schwarzenegger, the star of the blockbuster Terminator franchise, feeding his pet ponies Whisky and Lulu while asking people to stay inside their homes. 
“The important thing is that you stay home as there is a curfew now. No one is allowed out, especially someone like me who is 72 years old,” he says in the video. “After you are 65, you are not allowed out of the house.”  
Schwarzenegger’s appeal came days after his contemporary Tom Hanks and his wife Rita Wilson were diagnosed with coronavirus while on a trip to Australia. 
Wearing a Terminator t-shirt in the video, Schwarzenegger also urges people against visiting restaurants, gyms or public gatherings. “Listen to the experts, ignore the morons (foreheads). We will get through this together,” he added.
Stay at home as much as possible. Listen to the experts, ignore the morons (foreheads). We will get through this together. pic.twitter.com/FRg41QehuB
— Arnold (@Schwarzenegger) March 16, 2020

The ‘Terminator’, as he is referred to by fans, also changed his profile picture to one with his ponies. Earlier, over the weekend, he had posted a handwashing tutorial with his pet dog. 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
I tried to do a hand-washing tutorial for Cherry but I think you guys will pay more attention. Be safe. Wash your hands. Listen to scientists and experts, not foreheads. Together, we can slow this down and protect each other. #COVID19 pic.twitter.com/evDxVu6Etb
— Arnold (@Schwarzenegger) March 13, 2020

Also Read: Why doctors in Italy are letting some coronavirus patients die to save others
The coronavirus pandemic started in Wuhan, China, in December 2019 and has now spread to over 140 countries. Over 1.5 lakh cases have been reported with over 5,700 deaths, most of them in China, Italy and Iran. India has reported more than 115 cases, with two casualties, both aged over 65. 
PM Narendra Modi held a video conference with his SAARC contemporaries to handle the crisis and pledged $10 million to an emergency fund to tackle the virus. Meanwhile, the Delhi government Monday ordered the closure of gyms, nightclubs and spas and restricted any public gathering of more than 50 people, barring weddings, until 31 March. Cinema theatres are also shut down in the national capital to prevent the transmission of the virus.
