With pots, pans and bagpipies, Britons are ‘clapping’ every Thursday for healthcare workers
New Delhi: People across the United Kingdom have started a ‘Clap for our Carers’ initiative every Thursday to pay tribute to the National Health Service staff and other healthcare workers on the frontline of the battle against coronavirus.
In its third consecutive week now, and similar to Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s ‘thali bajao‘ initiative, Britons have banged pots, pans and played bagpipes to show their support for healthcare workers.
The Clap for our Carers website states: “Healthcare workers, emergency services, armed services, delivery drivers, shop workers, teachers, waste collectors, manufacturers, postal workers, cleaners, vets, engineers and all those who are out there making an unbelievable difference to our lives in these challenging times…bravo, you are amazing!”
The campaign began on 26 March when thousands of people came to their balconies or stood on doorsteps to applaud the NHS for its work. Since then, it has become a weekly event every Thursday at 20:00 BST.
Landmarks in the UK, like the London Eye, were also lit up on the first ‘Clap for our Carers’ initiative in support. Celebrities such as David and Victoria Beckham, and the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge were also involved.
UK’s Prime Minister Boris Johnson, who has tested positive for coronavirus, had joined the second ‘Clap for our Carers’ tribute on 2 April.
Apart from India and the UK, similar events have also been witnessed in other countries, including in Spain, France and Italy.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: PM Boris Johnson is improving in ICU but virus toll turns bleaker for Britain
The ‘Clap for our Carers’ initiative was devised by Annemarie Plas from Brixton in south-west London. She was inspired by similar events happening in her native country, the Netherlands.
Plas posted details about the initiative on social media channels and people across the UK joined her in the tribute towards healthcare workers.
Her bio as a campaign organiser on the Clap for our Carers website reads: “Annemarie has no ties to government or the NHS, she is just a hugely grateful mum staying at home like so many of us, who wanted to show her appreciation for all the key workers doing their bit to keep the world turning.”
