In a first, Army deploys medical team at civil coronavirus quarantine camp in Delhi
New Delhi: A medical team from the Army was deployed at the Narela quarantine camp in Delhi Friday where some of the coronavirus-infected patients from the Tablighi Jamaat event are being kept. This is the first time the armed service has been deployed at a civil centre set up to handle the coronavirus cases.
So far, the Army’s doctors and specialists have only been operating out of the quarantine centres set up by the force.
Defence sources said none of the quarantined people misbehaved with the Army medical team after reports emerged that some Tablighi Jamaat members refused to cooperate and even harassed civil medical teams.
“This deployment consists of two doctors and two nurses. They are accompanied by a protective unit as per standard operating procedure,” said an Army source.
Also read: There is a reason India turned to Armed Forces Medical Services when it came to coronavirus
Another source said that the deployment was made at the request of the health ministry after the Delhi government appealed for it since there was a lot of pressure on the civil medical teams.
The armed forces have already been directed to augment medical resources for civil health set-ups too.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Currently, there are six quarantine facilities being run by the Army — Mumbai, Jaisalmer, Jodhpur, Hindon, Manesar and Chennai — at which 1,737 people have been treated. Of these cases, 403 patients have been released.
The Army is also preparing dedicated Covid-19 facilities, including high-dependency units and intensive care unit beds, at 51 Army hospitals. Some of these facilities are located at Kolkata, Visakhapatnam, Kochi, Dundigal (near Hyderabad), Bengaluru, Kanpur, Jaisalmer, Jorhat and Gorakhpur.
Also read: It is war. Modi govt must deploy Indian military to fight coronavirus
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
