Modi govt telling businesses to pay staff but cutting its own employees’ salary is untenable
For over a month, almost all economic and commercial activities have been at a standstill due to the nationwide lockdown, which came into effect on the orders of the Narendra Modi government on 25 March.
Manufacturing units and sales outlets are shut, no monetary transactions are taking place between owners of industrial units and buyers, payments are stuck, job losses are mounting and will, at least in the next fiscal quarter, continue to rise.
And yet, the Modi government wants industrialists and businesspersons to keep paying salaries to their staff — even as governments in states such as Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Rajasthan, Odisha, and Maharashtra have announced salary cuts for their staff and the central government has frozen dearness allowance. This contradiction is unsustainable. 
It seems that the bureaucrats didn’t realise that these orders may be legally untenable.
Also read: Covid lockdown has ended only opposition politics in India. BJP’s shop is very much open
Some states have warned property owners against forcing tenants to pay house rent or evicting them in case they can’t pay. The Arvind Kejriwal-led Delhi government has assured landlords that they will be compensated if workers and students fail to pay the rent for the lockdown period. It remains unclear how feasible or legally implementable this is.
The central and state governments have cited the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 and the Disaster Management Act, 2005 while issuing the necessary directions, with some states playing it safe by terming these as advisories.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Many industrial associations have apprised the central and state governments about the inability to meet salary demands of the staff, pointing to lack of any kind of economic activity.
Also read: Shashi Tharoor: Modi govt wasted money on faulty Chinese Covid tests ignoring Indian options
The bigger jolt came from the Union home ministry’s flip-flop over proposed penal action against the directors and management of companies whose employees test Covid-19 positive.
Initially, the ministry of home affairs (MHA) had indicated that penal action would be taken but later clarified that such penalties would be applicable only if the offence occurs with “consent, cognisance or negligence of employer”.
#FactCheckClaim: MHA Guidelines prescribe penal action against company directors & management, if employees test positive for #COVID_19
Fact: MHA Guidelines misinterpreted. Penalties under DM Act'05 applicable if offence occurs with consent, cognisance or negligence of employer https://t.co/j9DTmIJr00
— Spokesperson, Ministry of Home Affairs (@PIBHomeAffairs) April 22, 2020

Who will decide if an employer was negligent and how will the negligence be established? Significantly, even though the MHA may have clarified, the damage – insofar as sending out a misplaced warning to employers – may have already been done.
There can’t be two different yardsticks under the same law – one for the government and another for the private sector.
Also read: Beyond speech, Modi must open govt purse for poorer Indians, businesses affected by COVID-19
Petitions filed in the Supreme Court challenging the home ministry’s arbitrary directions highlight how they are violative of Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution, which guarantee the right to equality and the right to do business.
A petition filed by textile exporter Nagreeka Exports challenges the Centre and the Maharashtra government’s order to pay full salary to employees, workers and contract labourers during the lockdown period even though factories are shut.
It argues against the directive, pointing out that the state government itself has decided to either cut salaries of employees or pay them in instalments.
The cash-rich government of India as well as BJP-ruled Uttar Pradesh have recently decided to freeze the dearness allowance payable to public officials. Tamil Nadu, too, has joined the list.
If the government can arbitrarily take such anti-employee decisions, why should the industry face such restrictions?
Legally, as clarified by advocates Suren Uppal and Sneha Baul to the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), while it may be okay for the government to make it mandatory for cash-rich corporates to pay salaries to their staff, there is no law that can be cited to in case of business owners even if their employees could be facing severe stress because businesses are shut “due to force majeure conditions such as natural calamities”.
All they need to legally establish is that the employees couldn’t have performed their duties from home.
Ideally, in testing times like these, the government works closely with various stakeholders to ensure that all genuine concerns are dealt with so that whenever normality returns, the damage is within manageable limits. But the Narendra Modi government has shown its inability to work with industry leaders and help businesses tide over the lockdown-induced difficulties. Perhaps, it would do well to not exacerbate their issues with such legally tenuous orders.
The author is a senior journalist. Views are personal. 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Hi..
I  was working with Faridabad export house, my  company  asked me to leave post on 14th May  with any  intimation as i Provisional period and even our factory terminated  many more staff  however my Boss instructed  all senior staff  to work  from home through ASANA app. He kept us busy  whole day  through zoom meeting/ Asana task/ phone calls to lineup and update all tasks to smooth working after office is open after lockdown.  As lock down extended in 1st week of April  but  our factory  manged to got some permission from government to resume work with short staff and he asked  me also  in my department to work in office during lock down. Now its been 3 weeks they have not cleared my dues yet  for April and may ,  nor even there is no information when  the dues will get cleared.
Please  help !
Hi..
I working in Delhi, company not given my full salary of march month they hold 10 days salary and clearly says not any payment in all lockdown time
They put us on leave till lockdown company not reliased any staff salary everyone is in trouble plz help us
Incase some company does not pay full month salary of March 20, what action can be taken against the employer
they are not getting pay of April. I work in gemini software solution Pvt ltd.
How we can complaint against company like they are not getting pay of April. I work in gemini software solution Pvt ltd.
Need clarification, incase if PM Modi has declared all public and private companies not to cut salary or lay off, then why the private sector is still not paying to their employers. There was an advisory released by Secretary of India, which is looped to all States and addressing all sectors. Under Covid 19 our country has already lost so many life’s now if government has instructed lockdown which eventually people are following, how people will survive without pay.
Need clarification, incase if PM Modi has declared all public and private companies not to cut salary or lay off, then why the private sector is still not paying to their employers. There was an advisory released by Secretary of India, which is looped to all States and addressing all sectors. Under Covid 19 our country has already lost so many life’s now if government has instructed lockdown which eventually people are following, how people will survive without pay. Modi ji n advisory states not to cut salaries but company is not paying. Please help me to understand what actions can be taken against the company.
Buddhujivi, govt spending cut money on pandemic but businessman don’t. Got it.
@Maneesh
Please dont write wrong articles.
You mention government has cut salaries,  the fact is increment of  DA is not allowed.
Please check your facts
If new rules to force industries pay without production means later date is bankrupt and closed industries.  Sickness need not to be penalized. Industries ultimately feeds hunger free environment.
Be composenate in difficult situation. Fight crona not production.
Narendra Modi does what he thinks is right never he thinks if it is right.  All his actions and talk are aimed at the electorates of which are 90% are ill informed and fed with fake information that puts other Political parties in a box.  Govt. has no right to decide on its own to deprive its employees of their salary that is their property which is protected under the constitution.  If DA and DR for its employees and pensioners can be withdrawn then the other component of the salary ie Basic can also be withdrawn.  This is illegal unless employees concern or the Pensioners concern consent to donating the amount.  Wearing mask of Covid -19 people are asked to express their solidarity and patriotism while the Govt. led by Modi is not in tune with that.  Why is Modi planned to build a new PM, Vice President and all the govt. offices residences  spread over the Delhi is going to be concentrated in one area in between Rastrapati Bhavan and India Gate with the expenditure of Rs. 20000 crore?  This is just the one item like this wasteful expenditure in giving security cover to its Party men all over India and its choosy men like Ramdeb Baba and the expenses are in thousands of crores.  MPLAD which never used to be accounted for by the CAG and where these money goes was never known to any one is stopped for good but the MLALAD which is much more than the amount that used to be paid to MPs are still paid, Why?
Sir, only you believe you are well informed? Please do not forget that the middle class which is educated and well informed has elected Mr Modi. So please get your facts right and nobody will tolerate your intolerance to Modi anymore.
What’s wrong in that. One month of lockdown and suddenly the business are dry if cash ? What about the profits earned year after year for decades ? These businessmen takes in crores of rupees of profit every year. So how is it that a month of business loss has made the situation so grim ? This is the time for them to give back to the society. The money in Swiss banks can now be utilised for the people of this country. Many corporate houses have found out ways and means to work from different locations and yet service their clients effectively. This is ridiculous argument about tenebilty.  But always expected from SG cronies in the media. Because Modi has said it, it has to be opposed. Had Raul Vinci  said this, then it would have been pearls of wisdom to be lapped up.
The author is not logical. The government has only said to pay salaries to employees. It has not enforced any amount. Just like government freezing DA, other employers too may not pay full payment. However if the employers don’t pay or pay a measly amount, government may intervene. That’s all.
