Centre says Mamata govt not enforcing lockdown in some pockets and lists ‘Muslim areas’
Kolkata: The Modi government has written to the Mamata Banerjee administration in West Bengal reiterating the need to strictly enforce the lockdown in the state.  
The central government has listed a number of places in Kolkata where it claims there “are no regulations” and a “number of exceptions” are being for marketplaces including those selling fish, vegetables and mutton. 
Of the seven places in Kolkata named in the letter, five — Rajabazaar, Topsia, Metiabruz, Gardenreach and Ikbalpur — are Muslim-dominated regions.  
Only Maniktala and Narkel Danga in north Kolkata are not dominated by the minority community in terms of population. The letter does mention that Narkel Danga has witnessed a good number of “Covid-19 like cases”. 
The letter from the ministry of home affairs (MHA), dated 10 April and  accessed by The Print, states that the union government has been receiving reports of “gradual dilution of the lockdown” in West Bengal. 
The letter mentions that “the above activities” are in violation of the home ministry’s orders and liable for penal action under the Disaster Management Act. The central government has also sought an “urgent” report from the state in this regard. 
West Bengal chief secretary Rajiva Sinha, however, said that the government did not receive any such letter as of now, while DGP Virendra did not respond to texts and calls. 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
A senior MHA official told ThePrint that the letter was sent to the state Friday evening and the senior officers should get it by Saturday morning. 
Also read: ED files money laundering case after clash between Trinamool Congress factions in Kolkata
In its letter, the central government has accused the Mamata Banerjee administration of making too many exceptions during the lockdown. 
The Centre has claimed that “shops relating to non-essential items have been allowed to function” and there is “no regulation in vegetable, fish and mutton markets where people have been thronging in complete violation of social distancing norms”. 
The Banerjee government has allowed sweet meat shops, the flower market and bidi workers to operate for restricted hours while abiding by the social distancing rules. 
The government has also allowed 15 per cent of the total workforce in the state’s tea garden to function. 
A couple of days ago, Banerjee granted permission to restricted operations of yellow taxis for emergency purposes. 
Also read: Bombs, bullets fly as Covid-19 lockdown fails to end violence in ‘politically-charged’ Bengal
The letter adds that the  state police has “reportedly” been allowing “religious congregations”.  
But there have been violations by both sides in this regard.  
Instances of people gathering at temples in West Bengal during Ram Navami were reported last week. And on Friday, prayers were reportedly held at a mosque in Murshidabad.  
Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has, however, repeatedly appealed to all community leaders to ensure there are no gatherings at any religious places during the lockdown. 
The letter has also questioned political leaders distributing ration, saying this  might have “resulted in spread of Covid-19 infection”. 
“Free ration has been distributed not through the institutional delivery system but by political leaders. This may have resulted in the spread of Covid-19 infections,” read the letter.
Also read: Don’t celebrate Bengal, news of home delivery of booze is fake. Be happy with sweets
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
