Times Group sends ThePrint legal notice for Covid-19 transmission via paper unlikely report
New Delhi: The Bennett Coleman and Co. Ltd., (Times Group) has served a legal notice on ThePrint for a report that claimed transmission of Covid-19 through newspapers and currency notes was theoretically possible, although it was most unlikely.
The report, titled ‘Transmission of coronavirus through newspapers, currency possible but unlikely: Experts’, was published on 23 March. It quoted experts who said there was a possibility of the virus reaching homes through paper products, including newspapers and currency notes. However, these experts also said among all the scenarios through which the virus can spread, transmission through newspapers is the least probable.
Echoing the report, the International News Media Association has also acknowledged research that says “it may be possible” for a person to get Covid-19 by touching surfaces with the virus on it. But it assures there has been no such reported incident and that such surfaces do carry “lowest potency for the shortest period of time”.
The Times Group’s legal notice, however, demands that the report be pulled down from ThePrint website as well as social media platforms, claiming it “disparages newspapers and their operations with malicious intention”.
It also threatens civil or criminal proceedings if the demands are not complied with.
The Times Group’s notice says the claims made in the report are “absolutely without basis and without appropriate findings by any health or statutory authority”.
It says ThePrint, through a “doctored” view of the situation, has acted with knowledge “to make wrongful gains and to cause unjustifiable loss to others”.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The Times Group has also taken objection to the fact that it wasn’t approached for its views before the article was put out.
The notice also calls the publication of the report an “unfair trade practice”. “You are a competitor to us and all newspaper organisations, and your actions are anti-competitive in nature. At the time of abundant misinformation and cluttered internet space, you have tried to hurt your true competitors in an exercise of unfair trade practice to hurt your competition under a deep conspiracy, for which you are jointly and severally liable.”
It quotes the World Health Organization (WHO) and America’s Centers for Disease Control and Prevention who have claimed the risk of contracting Covid-19 from newspapers is very low. This, the notice says, counters the claims made in ThePrint report published to “alter the perception of readers and make them stop newspaper subscriptions and deliveries”.
Quoting scientists, ThePrint report, however, had said exactly what WHO and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention claimed — that while infection is theoretically possible, its probability is very low.
Our report is a health and science-focused piece on how this new virus, about which so little is known around the world, behaves on paper and if it transmits through paper. The report quotes experts and studies that say while in theory the coronavirus can survive and be transmitted through paper products, it is most unlikely. If anything, the report is reassuring in anxious times.
The report is important and necessary considering the mysterious nature of the coronavirus and the largescale fears and misconceptions about it among people. It is a very important reader service.
The report is also fair and accurate. ThePrint stands by it. We are also flattered that the venerable Times Group sees ThePrint, not three yet, as a “true competitor”.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
In a time where contradictory views are emerging about probability of transmission of corona virus through newspaper and where nobody claims absolute authenticity based on any scientific findings, I would prefer to play safe and do not read newspaper till a unanimous advisory emerges. Till then I will be content with TV news and news on other electronic media.  Play safe – be safe.
China disinfected their currency notes because of the simple fact that the virus can squat on paper. Fight it out with them – it only exposes their lack of knowledge!!
Let me know if you need a lawyer – no charges!!
Most of those who are in Web news business are from print media. So it is always good to publish reports with disclaimer.  As every thing directly or indirectly has a human hand touch.  Yes Newspaper owners could have taken precaution at point of distribution. If newspaper are vulnerable what about paper covers which are now widely used in super market etc to end plastic menace. Then what happens to school textbooks which would get introduced during new academic session in few months.  Print and paper should Co exist. Both exist for common good
The Jains will do anything for money. Killing the opposition is just one of the
terrible things they have done over the decades especially in the South.  Shame
on them. BTW the Khaleej Times has begun delivering its edition in plastic bags.
I am agree with theprint that’s coronavirus transmission through newspapers.
