Can schools & students be trusted with Covid norms or should classes begin as curve flattens?
Over two lakh parents across India have opposed the Ministry of Home Affairs’ plan to reopen schools in July. On Saturday, the MHA announced ‘Unlock 1’, in which schools and colleges will be reopened after consultations with states and Union territories. Many countries like China, Taiwan, UK, Germany, Denmark and Norway have reopened schools.
ThePrint asks: Can schools & students be trusted with Covid norms or should classes begin as curve flattens?
Anil Swarup
Former education secretary
Schools are built on the foundation of discipline and should be trusted to adhere to Covid-19 precautions. Students and teachers are perhaps the most responsible members of society. It is absurd that places of worship and shopping complexes, which usually lack the same discipline, are being allowed to open prior to schools.
We need to remember that students don’t fall under the vulnerable age group for coronavirus. Mostly, it is people above the age of 60 who have a high risk of getting infected. So, we shouldn’t be paranoid about reopening schools.
Online classes have been picking up pace during lockdown, but they have their limitations and cannot replace the classroom experience. Although online classes have become a critical alternative during these tough times, not many students have access to broadband or even mobile internet. Some don’t even have their own mobile phones. This hinders their education and highlights the need to get schools up and running again. That said, teachers and school authorities are considering conducting physical classes every alternate day, and online classes on the other days. Splitting the class into two cohorts to maintain social distancing is another idea that is in the works.
Dr. Ameeta Mulla Wattal
Principal, Springdales School, New Delhi
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
When it comes to schools, let’s look at the adults in charge – the government, school authorities and parents. Since Covid-19 is a dynamic situation, there is a lot of uncertainty as to whether schools should reopen in July. I’d also like to reiterate that reopening India has been an evolving process and every decision is going to have to be relooked, reworked and re-evaluated as the situation changes. Few public spaces are reopening without being aware of the consequences and schools should not fall in the same category when they reopen.
Even if the government gives school authorities the green light in July, much will depend on how comfortable parents are and whether they are willing to risk sending their kids to school. Therefore, the question of trust deficit is not really between students and schools but rather parents and schools because ultimately, it is their responsibility. The real question is how trusting are parents of Covid guidelines and whether they are willing to accept that despite regular sanitisation and adhering to Covid precautions, schools can’t guarantee that nobody will contract the virus.
That said, I have heard concerns from many office-going parents that they do not want to leave their kids alone at home while they are at work. So, maybe many will be pushed into sending their kids into school. But for now, it is a waiting game.
Rashmi S Chari
Associate Director, Center for Curriculum & Research, Bluebells School International
Schools and teachers, who are entrusted with the responsibility of preparing the children for life’s hurdles, can be trusted to train students to follow Covid precautions. Many countries are already opening schools and training teachers and students to maintain social distancing.
But the Indian government is unlikely to customise instructions for reopening of schools according to their specific nature and location. This is troubling considering the fact that numbers of students per class, school infrastructure, differing resources in public and private schools, demographics and location are all critical factors.
The education ministries at the Centre and in states should recognise that there is no urgency to open schools, unlike small businesses whose survival depends on re-opening. Schools have the safe alternative of online classes. NCERT and state governments had been conducting classes for public schools using EDUSAT television channels.
The NCERT, CBSE and state boards should instead work on rationalising the syllabus, creating online teaching modules and age-appropriate online learning resources. Cyber safety issues should also be factored in. They should spell out formative assessment guidelines and prepare softwares for proctored assessments for the end of term exams. Schools should also be given a choice of either going hybrid or sticking to online classes.
Vatsala Sharma
Parent and co-founder, Language Curry
As a mother of a three-year-old and a six-year-old, I don’t see kids following social distancing norms. Schools should definitely not be opened for students of this age category. Not even for children up to 15 years. I stopped sending my younger child to a play school in May. I don’t foresee him attending classes till the year end.
I think universities should open up first and we should observe how it goes. Then, gradually we can think of opening high schools and play schools. Personally, just from observing the children in my society in Gurugram, I do not see them taking protocols seriously. I see a lot of older kids, even around the age of 16, playing with each other and hugging. They are not adhering to six-feet gap advisory at all, and so it will be difficult to expect the same from younger kids.
There is a concern among office-going parents about leaving their kids alone at home. But as a working mother running a startup, I see this a reality that everyone must deal with. That said, employers should also be mindful and identify employees with constraints and accordingly, give them the leeway. The emotional burden currently being felt by mothers is a reality and I think for a few months, while India unlocks, it is something we have to accept and adapt to.
Amir Ullah Khan
Professor of Health Economics at Indian School of Public Policy
There are many reasons why we should not be opening schools in a hurry. At least not in the near future. We have no conclusive data to support the claim that children are not vulnerable to Covid infection. The data so far suggests that like SARS and MERS, Covid-19 also does not really infect the school-going children aged between 6 and 14. However, at the same time, we know that there have been cases of severe illness among children too. Also, our crowded schools cannot maintain the social distancing protocols. Students must maintain 1 meter distance at all times, should be checked for symptoms while entering the premises, which must be sanitised regularly.
Each school exists in completely different local conditions, and so, uniform conditions cannot apply to all of them. Teachers and other staff will be at high risk from contracting the virus and in turn spreading the same among children. Finally, making children wear masks in these hot and humid conditions will be another challenge. We have an entire academic year in front of us. Even if classes start in October, we will have enough time to complete all teaching by April. Opening schools without data on transmission among children and without adequate testing will be very risky, to say the least.
Also read: CDC new Covid guidelines: Was lockdown necessary or did epidemiologists get it wrong?
By Pia Krishnankutty, journalist at ThePrint
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
School and colleges should not be reopened during such    worst times..   Our child lives matters the most.. Reopening school and colleges  is such a bad decision  government  is going to approve.. 70% of student are living as a paying guests.. the  landlords  will be hesitating to keep the student in their homes as students will be going to   colleges or many places.  half of the children doesn’t have their own transport facilities  and using public  transportation at such period may be more riskier..    Online education is going at very well manner   and until  the  this should be continued as well. but school and colleges should not be reopened.. Kindly show concern..
Schools should not open until we know how to deal with Covid , there are many alternatives for education. Online e-learning is going fine .
Let CBSE accept homeschooling also , allow parents to teach their kids at home and appear as private candidates for board exams if parents don’t feel safe to send them back to school .
I as a parent won’t send my kids until a vaccine is ready and the Covid positive numbers are either in size digit or zero .
My kids are not a mean to experiment to see if infection rates are less in the age group below 14.
Education ministry please come up with alternative but don’t force us to send kids to school. We wouldn’t be ready to send the kids back .
Schools should not open until the carona cure flattens.Iam against the school opening in july
Well I will not let my kid go to school even if they allow it to happen in July. There are more than 40 kids in many grades at school where my kid goes..
Social distancing in India is a fancy term used by many but its practical application in private or public institutes and public system is not designed to happen.
Our system is designed to catered to mass people and not Individuals. Above all MHA guidelines says kids below 10yr and adults above 65ys are vulnerable group so I will be very keen to see school opening guidelines that may be issued soon..
Are you gone mad, this is totally nonsense to open schools in this situation. Before open the school follwing point should kept in mind…which are really not ppssible to adhere…
1. Who will be responsile if a single child get infected ?
2. Do we have door to door isolation facility for kids like transportation, class arrangements, washroom facility ?
3. Is it eeally necessary or just a propeganda to get the fee for this acedmic session ?
There is no logic to open the school and College   in this situation.heath  is more important.there is no way student can follow the social distance.ti is fool to open the school n collage .Let see the results of South Korea the kids are covid positive.
It will be a blunder if schools are reopened in the current situation of covid19. Current academic session should run in a hybrid manner and students should be allowed to adopt online classes. Children can not learn in a fearful atmosphere where they would not be focused to their studies. Moreover the working parents should be provided a leeway to work from home
It’s not at all safe to reopen schools. Besides the concerns that have been expressed, one more important aspect is transportation..will school buses be safe with the staff..??
Schools should not be opened until snd unless the vaccination is made.
