How Maharashtra and southern states are celebrating Gudi Padwa, Ugadi in lockdown
Mumbai/Bengaluru: The countrywide lockdown to prevent the spread of novel coronavirus did not prove to be much of a damper on Gudi Padwa celebrations in Maharashtra. But in southern states, celebration of Ugadi festival was low-key.
Gudi Padwa marks the New Year for Marathis, while Ugadi festival marks New Year’s day for Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka.
In some parts of urban Maharashtra, celebrations were elaborate, but in rural areas, they were muted, not just due to the lockdown, but also because of a bad crop season. 
Unseasonal rain and hail storms in some parts and drought in other areas damaged the standing rabi crops.
The lockdown has caused a glut in cotton production, leading to bales of the produce being dumped in open fields and godowns. 
“What is there to celebrate? We have lost everything to the weather. We have no money,” said Makhrand Bhuse Patil, a resident of Parbhani near Latur.
In urban areas, since many households had stocked up essentials required for the preparation of Gudi Padwa delicacies, the lockdown did not affect them much. 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
But in some areas, people could not share the delicacies with their neighbours, which is a tradition, owing to the lockdown and the advisory to practise social distancing.
“Every year, about four families living in our building have lunch together. It is a tradition every year. We play games, sing songs and celebrate the whole day. Not this year,” said Snehal Joshi, a resident of Bandra.
Also read: Three-week lockdown is PM Modi’s surgical strike against coronavirus
The lockdown had its impact on the availability of priests, who conduct pujas before the ‘gudi‘ is hung up outside homes. 
A “gudi” is a small pitcher hung upside down on a long pole on which a new cloth is draped like a sari. The pitcher looks like the head. Flowers and sweets are also hung on the pole. Traditionally, the “gudi” is hung up at sunrise and dismantled at sunset.
Many people also complained about the non-availability of a sweet delicacy Shrikhand, which is prepared from hung yoghurt and is an integral part of the festival.
It is also a tradition to donate food to old-age homes and orphanages, but the lockdown didn’t allow it to happen. 
“My family celebrates the festival at an old-age home in Vasai every year. There are about 30 residents at that home and we buy them new clothes and take home-cooked food for them. I feel so sad that this year those residents will have no celebration,” said Advait Tambe, a resident of Thane.
Meanwhile, state minister for Urban Development Eknath Shinde chose to celebrate Gudi Padwa in a different manner.
His supporters have distributed masks and hand sanitisers to the needy living in his constituency in Thane.
Celebration of Ugadi festival in Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana was restrained as people mostly stayed indoors.
Ugadi is celebrated by tying neem leaves to house entrances and eating a mixture of jaggery and neem leaves — symbolising the bitter-sweet experiences of life.
In the wake of the coronavirus outbreak and the lockdown, governments of all the three states have urged people to celebrate the festival indoors and maintain social distancing. 
During Ugadi, people continue celebrations even two days after the main festival. The first day of the festival begins with a series of pujas and a grand feast of non-vegetarian delicacies takes place the next day. 
But this year, most people stuck to eating vegetarian food as in some parts of Karnataka, there was an outbreak of bird flu and cholera. Owing to this, sale of meat, especially chicken, declined drastically.
Due to the lockdown, people have also not stepped out to take part in a traditional form of gambling, which is an integral part of Ugadi festival. 
Village heads have also asked people to remain indoors and refrain from any playing sport associated with the festival. 
Also read: Modi cabinet practises social distancing at meeting, Amit Shah asks, ‘Are you?’
After the announcement of the full lockdown Tuesday night, heavy police deployment was seen across cities in all the three southern states.
Police also made announcements using loudspeakers Tuesday night, asking people not to gather in groups or rush to the local markets.
District administrations in all the three states have also banned inter-state bus services and blocked all inter-state roads connecting the southern states forcing people to remain indoors. 
Before the lockdown was declared, Karnataka Chief Minister B.S. Yediyurappa announced a one-time relaxation of curfew Tuesday night to allow people to travel to their villages to celebrate Ugadi. 
“We realise many want to go to their hometowns or want to come to Bengaluru for the festival. I have already requested people to celebrate this in as simple a manner as possible,” Yediyurappa said. 
“Whoever wants to leave Bengaluru or come to the city will be allowed to tonight (Tuesday night). From Wednesday, we will be putting in place stricter measures against  those who try to violate the lockdown,” he added.
However, the CM’s decision drew sharp criticism as many leaders pointed out that it would set a bad precedent. 
The purpose of lockdown stands defeated if people are allowed to travel when India is facing the possibility of community transmission of coronavirus, said senior Congress leader and former CM Siddaramaiah
In Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, the governments appealed to people not to throng temples on the pretext of Ugadi. 
Temples and markets wore a deserted look Wednesday as temple officials had sent out messages through SMS and social media, asking people to stay at home. 
For the first time in many years, the famous Tirupati Thirumala temple in Andhra Pradesh wore a deserted look Wednesday as it has been shut down as a precautionary measure. Pujas are, however, going on in the temple, but visitors aren’t allowed.  
Soon after the lockdown was announced, flower vendors in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana began dumping flowers on the roads, realising that they are going to incur huge losses.
Telangana Chief Minister K. Chandrashekhar Rao, meanwhile, gave a stern warning Tuesday and said he will be forced to call in the Army or issue ‘shoot at sight’ orders if people continue to violate the lockdown.
“Don’t create a situation where the government is left with no option but to give shoot at sight orders,” Rao said. 
He also added that he may consider asking the Army to take over if it comes to a situation where people continue to violate curfew orders.
