Coronavirus-hit China now reports H5N1 outbreak in Hunan province, culls 18,000 chickens
Bengaluru: After a deadly outbreak of the novel coronavirus, Chinese authorities have now confirmed a highly pathogenic strain of the H5N1 bird flu in Hunan province.
Almost 18,000 chickens have been culled in Shaoyang city in the southern province of Hunan as a result of the outbreak, China’s Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs said in a statement. The avian flu has not been reported in humans so far.
Of the 7,850 chickens on the farm where the outbreak has occurred, 4,500 had died of the H5N1 avian flu.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), H5N1 can be transmitted to humans via contact with infected live or dead birds. The agency, however, says the virus does not infect humans easily, and spread from person to person appears to be unusual.
Hunan is about 400 km south of Hubei province that has the city of Wuhan, which is the epicentre of coronavirus.

The influenza A virus subtype H5N1, also known as A(H5N1) or simply H5N1, can be treated in humans by available antiviral medicines.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
WHO says it is still safe to consume hygienically-treated poultry and eggs as the virus is sensitive to heat. Normal cooking temperature (70 deg C) will kill the virus, it states.
Meanwhile, the novel coronavirus has spread to more number of countries. In China alone, more than 300 people have been killed so far. More and more foreign citizens have been evacuated from Wuhan and other major cities in China are being cut-off from international air travel.
Scientists from Thailand recently claimed they have discovered a potential cure for coronavirus.
In India, three confirmed cases of coronavirus have been reported in Kerala and all three patients have had a history of travel and stay in China.
Third positive case of Novel #Coronavirus patient has been reported in #Kerala. The patient has travel history from Wuhan in #China 
Details here: https://t.co/dOTZ1DBan5 pic.twitter.com/N2R51RPSCB
— PIB India (@PIB_India) February 3, 2020

Also read: India temporarily suspends e-visa facility for Chinese & foreigners residing in China
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
