Pets shouldn’t die inside shops in COVID-19 lockdown: Animal welfare board to state govts
New Delhi: The Animal Welfare Board of India (AWBI) Tuesday urged state governments to ensure that animals kept in pet stores do not suffer as owners shut shops in the wake of COVID-19 lockdowns across the country.
The letter by AWBI Chairman O.P. Chaudhary reads: “It has (been) brought to the notice of the board that a large number of pet shops or…breeding facilities where animals and birds are kept for sale are now shut down due to lockdown/curfew.”
Chaudhary expressed concern over animals and birds remaining stranded inside shops without food, water or temperature control measures.
“All such pet shops are to be evacuated by the State Animal Welfare Boards through SPCAs (Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals)…Where there are no SPCAs available, the district administration shall ensure to check and evacuate all animals…,” the letter reads.
The AWBI’s letter came a day after it wrote another Monday urging all states to ensure animal fodder is made available across states during lockdowns.
The AWBI’s plea came after it received multiple complaints of animals — especially puppies, kittens, birds and fishes — being left to die inside shops.
“It is imperative for the administration to ensure that breeders don’t participate in this mass murder of animals by way of starvation,” an AWBI official told ThePrint.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
In its letter, the AWBI also says: “It is requested to kindly issue necessary direction to all district authorities to check the pet shops in the locality for searching of animals, if any and evacuate them.”
Police forces in cities like Delhi and Mumbai have agreed to let dog feeders venture out and feed stray canines, provided they take feeder passes from their respective district Deputy Commission of Police offices.
This was done to make sure the strays remain fed during lockdowns and do not become ferocious due to starvation.
Also read: Veterinary services must go on, animals can’t suffer during COVID-19, Modi govt tells states
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
