Parents worry over delayed exams, HRD minister asks them to wait and tell kids to do yoga
New Delhi: ‘When will the remaining board exams be held?’, ‘what happens to entrance exams and the new academic session?’ — these are some of the questions that dominated Human Resource Development (HRD) Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal’s live interaction with parents across the country Monday.
However, in the 45-minute interaction via Twitter, the minister, instead of giving definitive answers to the questions, told parents to wait and urge their children to “practise yoga” and utilise the time by preparing for the pending exams.
The HRD minister had on 25 April posted on his official Twitter handle that he will go live on 27 April and answer all questions that parents might have regarding their children’s education.
Questions were invited both on Twitter and Facebook using the hashtag #Educationministergoeslive and by Monday, a large number of responses were received, with majority of the parents asking the minister about the dates for the remaining Class 10 and 12 board exams, and the Joint Entrance Exam (JEE), the National Entrance and Eligibility Test (NEET) and other entrance exams.
Also read: Schools want summer vacations advanced, we’ll decide after lockdown: CBSE secretary
During the live interaction Monday, similar questions related to pending board exams and new dates for the JEE, NEET came up.
The minister did not give definitive answers to any of the questions and told parents to wait for the next announcement. 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“We are waiting for the situation to improve and as soon as things are better in the country and the number of infections are less, the CBSE will start preparations for the remaining Class 10 and 12 board exams,” the minister said while answering to a board exam-related question.
“Exams will be conducted only in 29 of the remaining subjects,” the minister said. 
This is not new information as the CBSE, earlier this month, issued a circular stating it will hold Class 10 and Class 12 board exams only for 29 subjects.
Officials in the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) had earlier told ThePrint that the board plans to fix a date for the remaining exams towards the end of May if the lockdown is lifted after 3 May.
Exam Controller Sanyam Bhardwaj had said the board will start evaluating the answer sheets for the exams already held, four days after the lockdown is lifted and announce a date for the pending exams after 10 days. 
Many parents asked the minister about the dates for the JEE and NEET. Both these exams have been postponed for an indefinite period of time.
In reply, the minister asked them to wait for the next announcement, and motivate their children to study and practise yoga. He asked students to make good use of the time now and prepare well for the pending exams.
Some parents asked about the academic loss and how the HRD ministry is planning to make up for it, to which Pokhriyal mentioned about the online education initiative undertaken by his ministry.
“The ministry has made various efforts to ensure that students learn online. We have been asking various teachers to give us interesting and innovative recorded lessons, which we can use for teaching students. Our Diksha portal (an e-learning portal) has seen an increased footfall ever since the lockdown kicked in,” the minister said.
He added that for students who do not have access to online education, there are channels on Direct to Home services like Airtel and Tata Sky that are broadcasting educational content.
Also read: Online exams if possible or pen-and-paper exams after lockdown, V-C headed panels tell UGC
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
