Don’t suffer alone — India and the world need to act against China’s intimidation tactics
China’s assertiveness is becoming increasingly brazen. This week, the Chinese Ambassador Cheng Jingye in Canberra threatened economic consequences if Australia continues to demand for an international investigation into the origins of the Covid-19 outbreak.  The Australian Foreign Minister Marise Payne rejected the threat, calling it “economic coercion”, even as she reiterated Australia’s call for the investigation.
China’s tone-deaf behaviour in the middle of a global pandemic — one whose spread is clearly the consequence of, at the least, Chinese mismanagement — may be a blessing in disguise, as an Australian commentator noted, because it “unmasks the (Chinese) regime’s true face”.
Also Read: US state Missouri sues China for ‘campaign of deceit’ over extent of Covid outbreak
China has been even more active in the South China Sea, sinking a Vietnamese fishing boat, setting up new administrative districts in the disputed Paracel and Spratly islands, intruding into Malaysia’s Exclusive Economic Zone, and conducting aggressive military exercises near Taiwan. India is unlikely to be immune from China’s belligerence, making it imperative that the Narendra Modi government cooperates with others to push back against such tactics.
The growing push back is coming from both the region and from farther afield. In the region, not only has Vietnam protested against the sinking of its fishing vessels, it has also accused Beijing of ‘seriously violating’ its sovereignty in the South China Sea with its declaration of incorporating Paracel and Spratly islands into new districts.
Surprisingly, given their previous lack of unity on the issue, others in the region have also joined in. President of Philippines Rodrigo Duterte, who has tried hard to appease Beijing, has also criticized China’s actions in the South China Sea.
Globally, China is facing the wrath of both the US and Australia. The two countries have sent warships to the region to support Malaysia. Even Sweden, not the one known to pick fights, has closed down the Chinese government sponsored Confucius Institutes — the latest in a series of tit-for-tat actions between the two countries.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
China’s behaviour after the coronavirus outbreak raises two issues.
Also Read: Pompeo says China responsible for Covid-19 outbreak, must detail origin of virus
One is the question of Beijing potentially miscalculating its way into a serious crisis with either the US or one of its neighbours.
In a provocative essay published last year, Derek Grossman, a senior researcher at RAND  — a leading US think-tank — had suggested that China might pick a fight with Vietnam as a “warm up”. Though the author suggests that India will not be a target for such a “warm up”, the Doklam experience still continues to rankle Beijing.
It was even referenced in the letter that Chinese dissident Xu Zhiyong wrote ridiculing President Xi.
China’s repeated miscalculations are a problem. While China’s power has grown tremendously, the prudence that marked China under Deng Xiaoping and his successors has withered under Xi Jinping. Wars often begin through miscalculations, and China’s apparent overconfidence portends danger ahead.
Also Read: After pandemic, Europe and China are set for a damaging diplomatic rift
The second question is what measures can be taken by China’s neighbours and the rest of the world to manage the country’s aggression. There is some good news here because China’s relentless aggressiveness is uniting the region like never before.
Although, we are far from any form of a regional military alliance, China’s behaviour is beginning to create a common understanding about the threat that it poses, which is the necessary first step for united action against the country. Until now, countries in the region appeared confident that they could manage China on their own. This was because they were worried about the reaction they would receive, if they made any moves to oppose China. But it is increasingly becoming clear to these countries that China appears to be driven by its internal demons, therefore all the efforts to pacify it are going to fail.
Asia is unipolar: China’s power cannot be matched by any combination of regional powers, let alone by anyone on their own. This simple reality means that the US has to be a part of any effort to counter China’s reckless behaviour.
But even with US support, there is not yet any appetite for a military pushback against China. There might be no reason to do that either, at least not just yet. The growing number of minilateral groups of countries suggest that there are other options. These groups — including the Quad and now the Quad plus along with India-France-Australia group — can weave a web of like-minded countries that can push back against China’s intimidation. For example, they can act together to limit China’s efforts to control multilateral agencies, but even more importantly, against its use of economic coercion.
China has been able to employ such tactics against countries like South Korea or Norway only because other countries did not support them because they were fearful of risking their economic relations with China. Now that such Chinese intimidation tactics are spreading, it is in everybody’s interest not to become the next victim or to suffer alone.
India has not been immune from coercive threats, as in the case of Huawei 5G competition. The country will suffer even more if China’s intimidation tactics succeed. New Delhi needs to act, with others, to ensure that China doesn’t.
The author is a professor in International Politics at Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU), New Delhi. Views are personal.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
All countries must take action against china, bcz china is making bio weapons, and encroaching other countries land, support terrorism with pak, grabb bhutan, making against to India with other countries, like Nepal, Srilanka, Pak, Bangladesh, china giving loans to india surrounding counties and taking their ports and lands as lease and using against india, making artificial islands in china to make army strong,  bullshit china, one day china will be collapsed with their ideology, rouge and cunning policy
India is a great country.  Whatever China did with Indian Army yesterday, known by the entire world. At such stage, India should breakout all relations activities of business etc. with China and give an suitable reaction to China as an earliest.
A lot of hot air in this article.
India’s response now should focus on wooing companies planning to move out of China.
Many countries are mere colonies of China now – read EU’ watered down communique  condemning China’s role in letting Corona get out if control. The Aussies spoke up and got reprimanded by China and backed off.
The best way to counter a China is to build  str economy.
One has to look at geo-political reality. China can be balanced singlehandedly by US alone. But US is slowly trying to dis engage as clear from it’s withdrawal from Afghanistan, as it does not want body bags. Under such condition only Alliance of India, Russia and Japan can balance China. So right policy of India would be to form un-official alliance with Russia & Japan.  it appears that Trump understands such ideas and so he trying to reduce tension with Russia.  it is good that Bernie sanders is out, as he was aligned with Islamists and fake liberals and human right activists. So basically he is against India & Russia. But with either Biden or Trump US will follow a hardnose policy to contain China.
Bells  of  WW3  are  being  heard   ringing   again  in  South  China  Sea    during  April  ,  2020.  Despite  working  to  control  a  pandemic  that  first  came  into  being  in   Wuhan  – China  around  December  2019  ,    Beijing  has  not  reduced  its  activities  in  the  South  China  Sea  ,  a  strategic  waterway  through  which  one-third  of  global  shipping  flows.   Some   appear  to  be     suspecting  that  Chinese  govt   survey  ship  Haiyang  Dizhi  8   may  be  exploring   oil   there.   It   is  informative    that  China  can   afford  to   divert  much   of  its  focus  to   South  China  Sea   while  battling  with  a  deadly   novel  coronavirus.  News  reports  around  21 April  ,  2020  ,  indicate  that   the  USS  America  ,  an  amphibious  assault  ship  and  the  USS  Bunker  Hill  ,  a  guided  missile  cruiser  ,  entered  contested  waters  off  Malaysia.  At  the  same  time  ,  a  Chinese  govt  ship  in  the  area  has  for  days    reportedly  tailing  a  Malaysian  State  oil  company  ship  carrying  out  exploratory  drilling.  The  news  reports  also   claim  that  the  Australian  frigate  HMAS  Parramatta   has    arrived  near   the  US  warships  in  April  2020  ,  to  join  the  US   Navy   in  exercises.   These  developments  in  the  South  China  Sea   by  just  a  week  to  May  2020   have  the  potential  of    triggering   something  dangerous  ,  could  even  be   probably   WW3.  In  this  context  ,  it  is  relevant   to  refer  readers  to   11  November  ,  2019   predictive  alerts  of  this  Vedic  astrology  writer  in  article  – “  Astrological  probable  alerts  for  2020”  –  published   at   wisdom-magazine.com/Article.aspx/5176/    on  1  January  ,  2020.  The  related  text  of  the  predictive  alert  reads  like  this  in  the  said  article  :-
“  Predictive  Conclusions
4.  The  months  of   April  to  June  ,  particularly   May-June  in  2020  ,  look  to  be  trending  into  the  scene  serious  worrisome  landscapes.  THERE  COULD  BE  SOME  WAR  OR  WAR –LIKE   CONDITIONS  ACROSS  THE  WORLD  ,  WHICH  THE  US  MAY  BE  CALLED  UPON  TO  ADDRESS.  SEA  OR  OIL  REGIONS  OR  SUCH  STUFF  SEEMS  TO  BE  CALLING  ATTENTION.  More  care  and  appropriate  strategy   may  be  taken  during  April  to  June  ,  particularly  May-June  in  2020  ,  against  spill  or  loss  of  such  stuff  as  are  known  for  repugnant  and  repulsive  smell  through  air  passage.  It  may  be  alright  to  take  pre-emptive  measures   against  potential  leakage  or  spill  of  oil-gas  in  vulnerable  regions  or  locations  during  the  said  period  of  time”.
Such  dates   of  May  as  6  ,  7  ,  13  ,  14  ,  15  ,  16  ,  25  and  26  ;   and   such  dates  of  June  as  3 ,  4  ,  11  ,  12  ,  21   and  22    may  be  kept  in  view.
Further    ,   this    writer  had  contributed  the  following  predictive  alert  last  year 2019   on  18 November  ,  to  the  opinion  piece  by  Mr.  Madhav  Nalapat   published  at   sundayguardianlive.com/news/warzones-heat-us-china-conflict-continues :-
“  kushal  kumar  says :
November 18 ,  2019  at  7 : 44 am
This  Vedic  astrology  writer  has  been  ,  for  some  years  past  ,  making  yearly  predictions  every  October-November  before  commencement  of  new  year  for  nations  like  India  ,  Singapore  ,  Japan  ,  Canada  ,  Italy  and  the  U.S.  In  relation  to  coming  year  2020  ,  this  writer’s   predictive  alerts  for  more  care  and  appropriate  strategy  were  published  as  early  as  on  10 October  ,  2019   through  article  – “  Predictions  for  world  in  coming  year  2020  by  kushal  kumar”   –  at  theindiapost.com.  Singapore  and  Japan  in  coming  year  2020  have  been  covered  in  October  2019   by  bringing  those  to  public  domain  widely.  The  U.S.  predictions  for  2020  have  been  submitted  to  Wisdom  Magazine  for  publication  in  its  monthly  Webzine.  It  is  expected  to  be  published  on  1 December  2019.   In  relation  to  worrisome  concerns  of  war   ,  there  could  be  even  some  kind  of  WW3   ,  April  to  June  in  2020  have  been  indicated  as  potential  time.  In  any  case  ,  even  if  better  wisdom  prevails  not  to  venture  WW3  ,  widespread  catastrophic  times  involving  huge  shortages  ,   disease  and  destruction  ,  massive  earthquakes  ,  floods  ,  storms  and  the  like  look   to  be  likely  in  vulnerable  regions  and  countries  ,  deep  economic  stress  or  disaster   during  the  said  period”.
It  is  a  well  known  history  that  South  China  Sea
Mr Kushal Kumar: I have studied International Relations and the many schools of thought that seek to explain the behaviour of nation states.  But to the best of my knowledge, you are the first one to apply “vedic astrology” – whatever the hell that is – to the analysis of International Relations. Brilliant work Mr Kushal Kumar !
While the Vedic Astrology paradigm is somewhat reminiscent of PM Modi’s claim that plastic surgeons in ancient India were able to sew an elephant’s head to a pot-bellied man’s torso and Narendra Modi gravitational waves, I will merely say the following:
The RSS vision of making India a “vishwaguru” is indeed becoming a reality thanks to brilliant Indians like you !!
It’s high time China be brought down to its knees for causing such an enormous amount of catastrophe through out the world. It’s responsible for the death of soo many young & old people + people who already are suffering from cancer & are not able to get their treatment on time + hugely responsible for the economic crunch + taking advantage of the situation to fulfil its own communist greed. How cool it is & not even bothered for the mistake it has done by clouding facts. All countries should stand together at this time & press charges against it for its callous attitude. This will decide China’s downfall.
STRONGLY DISAGREE. THIS IS THE RIGHT TIME AND HOPEFULLY AMERICA’S FALL WILL BE THE END RESULT OF THIS PANDEMIC . I CAN NOT SEE WHY SO MANY ARE EAGE TO SEE THE DOWNFALL OF CHINA WHERE AS AMERICA IS  REAL ROUGE NATION
A saying in Hindi goes, “diya bujhne se pehle fadfadata hai.” This now applies to China. At one time it was said that world war three would be for water, but now I think it would be due to corona virus.
The one and only way is economics and commerce. Firstly, the business powerhouses across the world must be restricted to partner with China, at the cost of reducing their top and bottom lines. Secondly, a new alliance among the big and strong (?) economy like India, Brazil, US,  must emerge to thwart the Chinese dependency. Thirdly and most importantly for India is to become self reliant in most of the areas at the earliest.
If all the countries join together,China can be bowed down .
India must take the lead and this is the right time .India must remember 1964 aggression by China on India and how China occupied ta large area of India .
China is to be taught a lesson .Hands when they join the miracle will happen .
Mr Rajkumar Dham: Clearly, you need to have a basic understanding of international relations before ranting nonsense such as:
“If all the countries join together,China can be bowed down”
That as you know is a pipe dream. There seldom have been situations where there was such a thing as a “global coalition”. Even a global pandemic such as COVID 19 has not elicited a concerted response from countries. Indeed, every major country has used this as a golden opportunity for one-upmanship as opposed to co-operation. The operating dictum appears to be famous quote of Emmanuel Rahm, former Chief of Staff to President Barack Obama
“You never let a serious crisis go to waste. And what I mean by that it’s an opportunity to do things you think you could not do before”
Indeed, this crisis is being used by authoritarian regimes and leaders everywhere in the world to consolidate their powers, upend democracy and jockey for re-positioning themselves in the world pecking order. From Victor Orban in Hungary through Narendra Modi in India to Dinald Trump in the US, the crisis  presents an unique opportunity to strengthen their hands on their respective domestic fronts with a view to cementing their own powers. For instance, Trump’s belligerence at China is dictated by a narrow re-election consideration than any grander over-arching strategy towards China. 
Likewise, the BJP’s and Modi’s obsession with being anti-Muslim and by extension anti-Pakistan means that India refuses to perceive China s the greater and more mortal threat to India. Pakistan can generate military pinpricks, China on the other hand can annihilate India economically and even militarily. But try telling that to rank and file worshippers of Modi and Hindutva and their congenital anti-Islamic attitudes and perception of Pakistan as the perpetual enemy will remain unchanged.
“China is to be taught a lesson” as you suggest is simply wishful thinking Sir.
Indians are much firm and determined to support the cause of democracy and welfare of each state of the world and the country. We survived millions of years in this universe with social responsibility and great humanistic culture. Never forget the glory of human Nature! We Indians are the Greatest God….. Christ and Buddhas are but on the boundless Oceans which We Are.
Chinese in technology, infrastructure, finance,Road building, Loan’s, taking over of Companies, Manufacturing, Industry ,as the world was Sleeping they have already Penetrated the Ozane layer in another one year they will make the whole world Kneel & beg before them for all the Product’s..
Just hot air, nobody is going to bell the cat.
