Chaos at Srinagar airport as families of students returning from Bangladesh lathi-charged
Srinagar: The Srinagar airport witnessed chaotic scenes after a group of Kashmiri students pursuing studies in Bangladesh returned Thursday.
Soon after the students landed, they were made to wait at the arrival section for more than two hours without specifying any reason, according to the family members of some students.
But the matter escalated after some students were “quietly escorted out” of the airport, while others were told that they would be quarantined despite all the students claiming that they have undergone fever screening through thermal imaging at Kolkata airport.
Their flight reached Srinagar via Kolkata.
The families alleged that the students, who were escorted out, were children of VIPs and were, therefore, home-quarantined, while others were sent to quarantine centres having “inadequate facilities”.
After some students were escorted out of the airport, the families of other students raised the matter and a heated argument ensued with the security forces.
The security personnel present at the spot then used lathi-charge to control the family members.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
A video of the commotion and pictures are now being circulated on WhatsApp.
Also read: Next batch of Indians stranded in COVID-19-hit Italy to be evacuated over weekend, says MEA
More than two dozen students were escorted by local police out of the airport.
The male students were taken to Haj House in Srinagar by bus and seven female students were dropped at a private hotel in the summer capital. Both groups are now under quarantine.
Tehleel Mushtaq, whose sister is pursuing MBBS in Dhaka, told ThePrint the students had requested the authorities at the airport multiple times to let them go as they had already been screened at the Kolkata airport.
“Yet they were kept together at the airport. Some students, probably children of VIPs, were escorted quietly and when the parents objected to this, they were thrashed. Later my sister and other students were escorted without informing the parents where they would be taken. Their phones were taken too but later returned to them. Some parents followed the police vehicle in which the students were being taken and then discovered the locations where they were supposed to be quarantined. It was complete chaos,” said Mushtaq.
His sister sent an audio note to him when she was waiting at the airport. 
“It is a complete mess. They created a separate section for VIPs and they were taken out of the airport. We are told we will be quarantined,” she can be heard as saying.
A senior airport official, however, told ThePrint: “There was an order from the divisional commissioner’s office that said the arriving passengers needed to be quarantined. There was some delay and this caused panic. The police took action and pacified the situation.”
The official denied the allegation that some students were escorted out without being screened and were home-quarantined based on their status.
Brother of a student, quarantined at the Haj House, said all the students have been kept together when they should have been separated.
“They have been put in one large hall. At least 20-25 students are together. We are appealing to the authorities to do the needful. We understand that they need to be quarantined but the conditions inside are not good. Especially the bathrooms are in bad shape,” said the brother, who didn’t want to be named.
On the allegation that quarantine facilities are shabby, a senior Jammu and Kashmir administration official said authorities concerned are ensuring that all precautions are taken for the well-being of the students.
“The concerns of the parents are being looked into. The UT administration is working tirelessly to ensure the well-being of each and every citizen,” said the official.
Also read: Kejriwal govt orders Delhi restaurants to shut shop with immediate effect until 31 March
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Why is this agency always speaking in a pathetic and overly inaccurate manner. It is always efficient for people comming from other countries to be quarantined for the safety of the local people. We have seen gross negligence by people returning from foreign countries and defying home quarantine rules by travelling in public transport. It is better that authorities ensure that home quarantine is followed to contain its spread.
Violence is never justified but this publication is always skeptical of indian authorities.
They are the ones who have to put forth every day away from families to ensure safety.
Cash paid to jihadis in Kashmir for admission in Bangladesh makes them deserve thrashing.
I think students must be let loose in Kashmir they deserve God’s punishment for killing and looting their teachers and neighbours the kashmiri pandits. They deserve the worst.
Dear sir what sort of menatality you have how can you justify your comments you idiot / bigot learn to be human first
Dear sirs
Kindly refrain from giving stray and unfounded blames upon a particular community for what is happening across the world.what happened at Srinagar airport is a matter and allegation of discrimination between the two groups of students i e one group belonging to VIP families and one to …..! .If at all it is a fact which i hope authorities will entire into , the law will take its own course .
The cornovirus is a curse of nature and let us defeat it by joining our hands irrespective of caste and religion.
Last but least i sincerely request you all to just consider as to how this ugly disease started and what are the reasons .This too we can do together .
Stay safe and follow the rule of social distancing .
I honestly love you all
