War against Covid-19 cannot be won only by lighting lamps, need proper planning: Congress
New Delhi: The Congress on Sunday said lighting lamps alone will not help win the war against coronavirus and demanded answers from the government on the safety of health workers in the absence of adequate protective gear.
The party also said lifting of lockdown should not be done in an unplanned manner as its implementation.
“Just as lockdown alone cannot fight coronavirus, lighting alone cannot help. Merely lighting a lamp will not help win the war against coronavirus. If the Government of India does not fulfill its duties, it is not possible to fight the war against coronavirus, Congress spokesperson Sushmita Dev said at a press conference through video conferencing.
“There has to be proper planning and provision of personal protection equipment (PPEs) to those fighting this war. There is also the need for an economic package for the poor and vulnerable,” she said.
Also read: Those who can’t manage a pet without a maid are criticising PM Modi: BJP general secretary
Highlighting the absence of enough protective gear for the medical workers dealing with COVID-19 cases, Dev said at least 50 doctors have been infected by the deadly virus.
She also sought to know when would the Centre provide compensation to those who have died due to coronavirus, as she said state governments were not financially equipped to provide the same.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“Hundred people have died so far, will the central government give compensation to their families? These are some questions which we ask in national interest and not in criticism of the government,” she said.
Asked if the Congress supported lifting the lockdown, Dev said it is for the government to decide.
“We only hope it is not done in an unplanned manner as the lockdown was imposed the sacrifice of people and the hardship faced by them for the last 21 days should not go waste,” she noted.
The Congress leader also alleged that against the demand of 62 lakh PPE kits, only 3.34 lakh kits are available for doctors and paramedical staff at present.
“If we cannot protect our doctors, nurses, technicians and other paramedical staff who are in the forefront of fighting this war against coronavirus, then this country is not prepared for this fight, Dev said.
Accusing the government of delaying by five weeks issuing orders for allowing manufacture of PPEs locally in the absence of guidelines till March 24, she said the 50 doctors who contracted the disease could have been averted.
She also asked if the government has approved any agencies to test these PPEs manufactured locally.
Dev also questioned the government on increasing the number of ventilators required in the country, as only 40,000 of them are available, of which 20,000 are not working properly, according to reports.
She also called for large-scale testing to curb the spread of the disease.
“We cannot be successful in this war against coronavirus unless the government increases the scale of testing,” the Congress leader said.
The number of COVID-19 cases rose to 3,374 on Sunday and the death toll stood at 77 in the country, the health ministry said.
Also read: Poke fun at taali, thaali, diya and mombatti all you want. Modi couldn’t care less
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Some Congress people are becoming wise.  It is good sign for our country and its democracy. But alas ! Period required for this   political quarantine  is some four five decades.  Will  your party survive four/five decades of deprivation and hunger pangs  of power for so long ? Even, The journos parroting your party line are more ridiculed  than respected .
Only Congee stupids can think that Covid-19 can be won only by lighting lamps. One of the reason for Congress rout is its turning of facts upside down. Nobody can save a political party of such stupid people.
There are some who believe that MODI will not be there for all times to come.
And when the Prince comes back it will be our time, in the meantime blame Modi for not correcting our screw-ups.
Raising issues of absence of protective gear, safety of health workers and economic relief for the poor, all that was available till 2014, has Modi sold it and kept the money in some tax haven ?
OR was the money meant for these things never spent over 70 years and siphoned out to the private accounts of the leaders of those years?
Hopefully we will know, the onion peals are come out now.
Lady, be smart,like the Maharaja, heritages do not last for ever.
The very first sentence here is sufficient to reject out of hand,  this blabber from Congress, which is taking its cue only from what “The Family” thinks about it, and  not logic.  From Modi himself to the lowliest person in the Government or party, NO ONE has even hinted that  “Lighting lamps ALONE will win the war against CV”.   Could they not see with their own eyes that ALL of the services relating to the treatment and eradication of CV was  still  going on? Congress is highly Negative and,  except for a few voices, CERTAINLY NONE from any of its vaunted “Family”, Congress talk  simply has to be ignored.
