Lucknow’s cantonment area sealed off after 12 Tablighi attendees test positive for Covid-19
Lucknow: The Lucknow cantonment area adjoining Sadar Bazar has been cordoned off, barring even soldiers, and curfew in the Bazar extended for 48 hours after 12 people living in a mosque in the area tested positive for coronavirus. The group had attended the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in Delhi in March, a religious event that has turned into the biggest Covid-19 cluster in South Asia.
Lucknow Police Commissioner Sujit Pandey had said that 12 members of Tablighi Jamaat were found staying in a mosque in Sadar area on Friday. “They had tested positive for coronavirus. As soon as, the information was received, Sadar was turned into a sterile zone to prevent spread of the virus,” he said, according to PTI.
The mosque where the group was discovered is located in Kasai Bada, a residential area of Sadar Bazar with a population of 50,000 people surrounding the cantonment.
P.K. Gupta, the police chowki in-charge of Lucknow Cantonment, told to ThePrint, “Even the soldiers cannot enter without permission. Out of bound is done when an area is considered unsafe for the jawans.”
“Only military medical teams, QRT (quick reaction teams), emergency MES (military engineer services) services and essential services will be allowed in the military areas,” Gupta said.
Public announcements were made in the area asking people to stay in their homes.
In the past three days, Lucknow city hasn’t registered any new cases of coronavirus.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: Tablighi Jamaat congregation and how religion has been the ‘super spreader’ of coronavirus
The measures were imposed after a medical team surveyed the area surrounding the masjid Saturday, during which an altercation broke out with residents. On Sunday, the team returned with a police escort.
Dr Dinesh Singh who was part of the medical team, said “We were intimidated yesterday by the locals of the area after which we had to leave,” and added that they were having trouble getting the full details from them.
“We will only survey those who are willing to tell us about themselves, else we let them be as there is not much we can do,” Dr Singh said.
There have been several reports of members of the Tablighi Jamaat being uncooperative and misbehaving with medical personnel at quarantine camps.
