Friday prayers suspended in Jammu and Kashmir as Srinagar records first Covid-19 death
Srinagar: The Friday congregational prayers will not be held in major mosques of Kashmir in the wake of the Covid-19 outbreak, government officials told ThePrint.
Among the major Islamic institutions that have taken the decision is Srinagar’s Jama Masjid, considered to be J&K’s most prominent mosque.
Along with the Jama Masjid, Jammu and Kashmir Grand Mufti and Jamiat-e-Ahle Hadith — one of the largest socio-religious bodies — have also decided to suspend congregational prayers to arrest the spread of the deadly Covid-19 virus.
The Srinagar administration also formally ordered closure of all religious institutions, including gurudwaras, shrines and mosques, and appealed to the management committees of all places of worship and all residents of the district to cooperate with and support the administration in this decision.
Officials in other districts of J&K said they won’t allow large gatherings or congregational prayers as well, and religious clergy have been roped in to enforce the directions.
“Those violating the lockdown orders can face legal action under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, which lays down punishment as per Section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, for flouting such orders”, the government advisory said.
“The Government has also urged the general public to maintain social distancing as it is the key to stop and prevent the spread of Covid-19 from those who are infected,” said the administration in a statement.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also Read: Social media trends #MakeChinaPay as Covid-19 forces people into indefinite quarantine
The administration’s efforts come after J&K reported its first Covid-19 death, a 65-year-old man in Srinagar.
This is the first time that the congregational prayers have been suspended across the region due to the Covid-19 pandemic.
The first case to be reported in the UT was on 18 March after which the religious clergy here had suggested that elderly and sick people should remain home and not come out for the Friday prayers on March 20.
However this time around, with the rising Covid-19 cases across the country and in the Valley, various religious bodies and heads of prominent mosques had decided to suspend the prayers all together.
Not only have they suspended the Friday prayers, they have also advised not more than two-three people should attend the daily prayers held in mosques.
J&K Grand Mufti, Nasir-al-Islam told ThePrint, “We have consulted specialists, medical experts and doctors all of whom are of the view that congregational prayers must be avoided. I appeal to the people of Jammu and Kashmir to pray at their homes. We have directed that the Azaan (call to prayer) be delivered because people have an emotional attachment to it. It soothes them and pacifies them in these desperate times. But please do not gather”.
A senior caretaker at the Jama Masjid, who wished to remain anonymous, said the decision to suspend the Friday prayers came after consultation with various socio-religious bodies and the elderly of the community.
“For now the prayers will remain suspended,” the caretaker said.
The administration in a statement issued Thursday said, “In an effort to contain spread of the infection in the district the District Magistrate Srinagar (Shahid Choudhary) has ordered closure of all places of worship in the district. Major shrines and gurdwaras supported the decision of the administration and made the initiative in this regard. Some of these closing gates in support of the call as soon as requested Thursday morning include — among others — the revered Hazratbal shrine, Naqshband shrine, Dastgeer Sahib shrine and Chattipadshahi gurdwara”.
The decision came on a day when J&K recorded its first death and coincides with the positive testing of the youngest patient, an 8-month-old.
“Two more positive cases in Srinagar. Siblings (7-years-old and 8-months-old) — grandchildren of a confirmed case from Srinagar with travel history to Saudi Arabia who had tested positive on 24th. Total number of active positive cases now 11”,  tweeted government spokesperson Rohit Kansal.
The siblings are grandchildren of the individuals who had come in contact with the first Covid-19 patient of Kashmir, a 67-year-old woman who had a travel history of Saudi Arabia.
Dr Rabbanie, a public health specialist currently engaged in fighting Covid-19, told ThePrint that medical teams will have to study the behaviour of the virus given that it has not so far “voraciously attacked children,” when asked about the two new cases in Kashmir.
As of now 3,053 persons have been kept under home quarantine, including at facilities operated by the government, while 117 are in hospital quarantine.
“Persons who are under home surveillance stand at 1761 while 551 persons have completed their 28-day surveillance period.  Further, the Bulletin said that 379 samples have been sent for testing, of which 341 tested as negative and 13 cases have tested positive of which one recovered and one died. Reports of 25 cases are awaited till March 26, 2020,” said the administration in a statement.
