Cremate all Covid-19 victims’ bodies, regardless of religion, VHP tells govt
New Delhi: The Vishva Hindu Parishad (VHP) has asked the government to cremate the bodies of all those who have died of Covid-19, irrespective of religion.
It has also demanded strict action for the Nizamuddin Markaz incident, in which nearly a hundred Covid-19 cases have been traced back to a three-day gathering organised by the Tablighi Jamaat in Delhi in mid-March.
Speaking to ThePrint, Alok Kumar, working president of the VHP, said: “A coronavirus-infected deceased must be mandatorily cremated, irrespective of religious affiliations, to stop the spread of the infection. We have requested the government to look into this.”
Kumar said the VHP has requested the Muslim community to not allow the use of mosques for assembling, which could be a medium through which the coronavirus can spread. He said while all other religious places have closed voluntarily, the Muslim society should itself come forward and close with immediate effect all the mosques in India that are still open.
The VHP also put out a press release reiterating these points.
The statement comes two days after an uproar in Maharashtra on the same issue — Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation commissioner Praveen Pardeshi had put out a circular that bodies of all Covid-19 victims would be cremated irrespective of religion, but had to amend the circular after the state government intervened. The circular was criticised by Maharashtra minority development minister Nawab Malik of the Nationalist Congress Party, and later, All India Majlis-e-Ittihadul Muslimeen chief Asaduddin Owaisi, who said it was against health ministry guidelines.
Also read: Coronavirus was a test of secular nationalism. Then Tablighi Jamaat became the scapegoat
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The VHP statement termed the Nizamuddin Markaz incident as “shameful” and “unfortunate”, saying it may shatter the 18-day struggle against the novel coronavirus and the achievements of the pan-India lockdown. It also used the word “obstinate” for Muslims insisting on their dead being buried.
“For covering up their unpardonable crime, the Markaz officials are daring to hold the administration and police accountable,” it said of the Nizamuddin incident.
“The entire country is taking all pains and making all kinds of sacrifices to break the chain of Corona (sic) spread. Most of the shrines were closed voluntarily to avoid crowds and make social distancing a success. But some people forcibly insisted to offer Namaz in mosques,” the Hindu body said.
“Similarly, it was obstinately insisted to bury the dead corona victims while everyone knows burial causes the Corona bacteria (sic) to spread rapidly. We appeal to all responsible people of India to motivate their communities to move back from such intransigence and dogmatism. The mindset and mentality will not only hurt the country, they themselves cannot benefit either,” it said.
It added that “instead of taking out these elements hiding in markaz, Mosques and Madarsas, they should be quarantined in those buildings themselves and treated there, so that the pandemic remains confined and curbed there”.
“Those foreign Mullahs and Maulavis with tourist visa who have indulged in the promotion of their religion and fundamentalism, their visas should be cancelled, and strict legal action should be taken against them,” the VHP further said.
Calling out “liberals” for their “silence” on the Nizamuddin incident, it added: “Recently, the so-called secular intellectuals of the country went to places like Shaheen Bagh and supported the protestors and their countrywide violence. Their silence on this development is surprising. Our appeal to them is to use their influence to stop such activities.”
Also read: Dear Muslims, Tablighi Jamaat committed a crime against humanity. Don’t defend them
 
