After bartan bajao, PM Modi asks Indians to light lamps, candles as symbols of hope
New Delhi: After calling for applause for healthcare professionals, Prime Minister Narendra Modi Friday urged the nation to light candles and diyas for nine minutes at 9 pm Sunday to “defeat the despair” brought on by the Covid-19 pandemic.
“To defeat the darkness of despair and light our lives with hope, let us switch off all lights for nine minutes at 9 pm on Sunday (5 April) and illuminate our surroundings with candles, diyas, torch or mobile flashlights. Let us maintain social distancing during this,” he said in his video address to the nation Friday morning.
The Prime Minister also praised Indians “for their discipline and service”, terming it phenomenal. Modi also pointed out that the economically weaker sections of the society have been hurt by the 21-day lockdown, and stressed on support for them.
“Your discipline and service to the nation has been extraordinary during the last nine days of the lockdown,” Modi said. “Authorities have done everything to contain this situation. Your thanksgiving on March 22 has become an example for many countries who are emulating this now.”
His last address asking people to clap, ring bells or clang utensils to applaud the people rensering essential services had seen the public come out on the streets in groups on 22 March. This time, Modi emphasised that people should maintain social distancing Sunday, terming it the ‘Rambaan’ to fight epidemic. He urged the people not to come out in groups.
“Do remember we all are in our homes, and we are together in this. We have to cut through coronavirus pandemic darkness and move to a brighter tomorrow,” Modi said. “Many may think we are alone. Such questions might come up in your mind. But please remember, none of us is alone. The strength of 130 crores of India is with each one of us.”
 
Also read: 5 new projects India will pursue to find treatment for Covid-19 and similar diseases
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
My “Sastang Namaskar” to our beloved Modi Sir to constantly think of us and talk to us during this time of uncertainity. We have seen prime ministers before from this and other countries but no one sounds as genuine and sincere as Modi Sir is. I wish for him and all our countrymen to be safe and a big God bless to my motherland. Jai Hind
One hopes obsequious state electricity boards will not cut power supply at nine pm for ten minutes.
He is using the occassion to strengthen his hold of central authority on ppl directly over states.
There is a Jamavda that thinks Modi  is just NAUTANKI. After the THALI BAJAV now it is BUTTI LAGAV.
Sir, this man is not an Ex-BABU from UN, or a LAWYER charging LACKS ++ to get a date in SC, or a member of the Intellectual Arrogant Society, or someone  selling his earlier generation for making a living in the business of politics at the cost of the people.
AL LEASE GRANT HIM THAT.
Opinion is like an arsehole, everyone has one,, but where to bare it is your prerogative.
#मोदी_मदारी_बंदर_कौन
