GDP growth could slip to zero or negative in 1st quarter due to lockdown: NITI Aayog VC
New Delhi: The GDP growth could slip to zero or even negative in the first quarter due to the impact of the countrywide lockdown imposed to contain the spread of the deadly Covid-19, NITI Aayog vice-chairman Rajiv Kumar has said.  
While there is a chance that this may not happen since essential services are functioning, the virtual shutdown of all other sectors of the economy could result in a zero or negative GDP growth, Kumar said in an interview to ThePrint.  
“See all the essential services are still working, so a small part of the economy is moving, that means it should not slip to zero,” Kumar said. “But it could slip to zero or even negative, who knows? It depends on how long the economic curfew lasts… What is clear is that the economy would be hit very hard during this quarter.”  
Beyond June it would not be possible to provide any forecasts, Kumar said. “There is too much uncertainty — it depends on the length, severity and spread of the pandemic.”  
Kumar, however, ruled out the possibility of a recession as after June, he does expect some sectors like hospitality, transport, entertainment and FMCG to start functioning.  
“We expect the service sectors, which constitute 55 percent of the economy, to pick up immediately after; so there could be a revival of sorts.”  
Asked if there is a consensus in the government that the economy and economic revival is second priority at the moment, Kumar said, “Saving lives has to be first priority, yes, and we should stick to that consensus.”  
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Explaining the rationale behind not announcing a big economic stimulus for the lockdown period, Kumar said, “We are not as opulent as some of the Western economies… We wish we were, but we are not.”  
“We will have to calibrate our fiscal response so that we do not go overboard,” he added. “But this is not to say that more steps are not in the pipeline. 
Earlier this week, Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman had announced a Rs 1.7 lakh crore relief package for the poor and migrant workers who have been hit the hardest by the lockdown. 
RBI Governor Shaktikanta Das Friday announced a deferment of all loan repayments, effectively allowing borrowers to not pay any equated monthly instalments or EMIs for any loans until 30 June. 
Kumar said that we should look at the government response both as a fiscal and monetary package. “Together, it is a significant package.”  
“It has not been quantified but the debt moratorium for three months announced by the RBI would cost the banks some amount of money,” Kumar said. “The fact that the governor said that it would lead to Rs 3.75 lakh crore extra liquidity into the system – that has its own financial implications and cost that the government will have to bear.” 
“The government will have to sell its bonds, and the government debt will go up in that sense,” he added.  
Also read: This is the team advising PM Modi in India’s battle against coronavirus
Kumar, however, said it would not be correct to ask how the schemes under the relief package would be funded by the government.  
“One cannot compare the government to the household… Theoretically speaking, the government has the recourse to unlimited money since it can print it,” he said. “For example, Trump has announced a $2 trillion package, now where is that money going to come from?”  
But in his personal capacity, and not as vice-chairman of the government think-tank, Kumar said that the times are calamitous enough for the government to ask individuals to donate to the government coffers. 
“In India, the private economy is always a surplus economy, so if the government feels the need, it could ask individuals to come forward and donate,” Kumar said. Emphasising that the view is a personal, and not official one, Kumar further said that it is something that late prime minister Lal Bahadur Shastri had done during the 1965 war.  
“There is 25,000 tonnes of gold with people, trusts, temples in India… In the 60s, I remember our mothers and grandmothers coming forward to give it to the government,” he said. “I believe we are in a similar situation today, and that is the kind of response we need from people.” 
Also read: Army may recall retd personnel with medical expertise if fight against Covid-19 intensifies 
 
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Sh Kumar has rightly analyzed the situation in our country  he is a right thinking person.
Why we are all worrying about Economy at this time of Crisis , when our life is at stake ?? Every Nation will suffer the same . Cant we people be little sensible enough to realise that if we dont survive then what’s the point of thinking about Economy?? Economy doesn’t only depends on Government but also on the Citizens as well . How Hard u are working matters the most .
          And the UPA Govt given so much of loose in the Loan Regulations that many of the payees didn’t paid their debts and they were all ignored . It’s a result of the past . Not of the present or NRC , CAA or etc. 
Let’s Stand United by keeping aside our Ideologies .
After all We are all Hindus (People of Hindustan).
Country locked down since 25th of March 2020.. Only 7 days lockdown during 1st quarter brings gdp growth to that extent. ?
What else can we expect from a government that is irresponsible…
We are all in a mess… Our Government thinks only after acting…. be it DEMONETISATION.. or GST… or CAA … or NRC…what else can we expect… from these Gentlemen…
This Thug Chokidar chor hai thinks that no
 body in universe is intelligent then him in respect of cheating people & spreading Jumlas.He does not considers any famous economist of HARWARD as he him self  is hard worker in respect of to fool people he him self can manage NITI AYOG without the help of any award wining Economics.Jai ho Thug Chokidar chor hai.
It was the responsibility of Niti Aayog to stop show-off projects like Statue of Unity but they failed to do that. I was surprised to see that senior members knew more about Ramayam and less about development economics.
Comment par excellence.
I really didn’t expect Print to be twisting headline. It’s clearly not what he said, and the headline has been handpicked to grab eye balls. 
