Bengali Market among 22 areas sealed in Delhi to combat Covid-19 spread, see full list
New Delhi: The Delhi government has sealed 22 Covid-19 hotspots in the national capital to combat the spread of the novel virus.
Talking to reporters after a high-level meeting, Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia announced Wednesday night, “Nobody will be allowed to enter or exit from these areas.”
The government will ensure delivery of essential items in the areas that have been sealed, he added.
The areas sealed include Hauz Rani, parts of Dilshad Garden and Dinpur village. 
Sources in the Delhi government told ThePrint that more such areas, including those in West Delhi, would be sealed in the next two days. 
Sisodia, who was speaking after the high-level meeting held between Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal and senior officials of the government, said there will be 20 more such places in Delhi where people would not be allowed to come out of their lanes or apartments and those from outside will not be allowed in. 
ThePrint also learnt that WhatsApp Groups have been created by nodal officers to ensure proper coordination with the district magistrates. This, in turn, will help people in contacting the officers concerned for delivery of grocery or medicines, a Delhi government official said.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Authorities have also sealed the popular Bengali Market after three cases of novel coronavirus emerged from the area.  
“After three positive cases were found, the administration conducted a house-to-house survey and screened 2,000 people,” said a circular issued by the New Delhi District Magistrate Tanvi Garg. 
Talking to ThePrint, Garg confirmed that at least two people living in quarters above the market were found to be symptomatic.
She added that 35 other people were found to be living inside the Bengali Pastry Shop in small and confined space with no norms of social distancing being observed. Following this, the DM ordered containment of Bengali Market, Babar Road, Todarmal Road, Babar Lane, and the School Lane.  
The DM has also directed the police to initiate action against owners of Bengali Pastry Shop under various sections of the IPC and Epidemic Act. The 35 people will now be shifted to shelter homes. 
1. Gandhi Park, Malviya Nagar
2. Gali No 6, L1, Sangam Vihar
3. Shahajahanabad Society, Plot No. 1, Sector 11, Dwarka
4. Dinpur village
5. Markaz Masjid, Nizamuddin Basti
6. Nizamuddin West (G and D block)
7. B Block, Jhangirpuri
8. 40 houses in Gali No. 14, Kalyanpuri
9. Mansara Apartments, Vasundhara Enclave
10. 3 galis in Khichirpur
11. Gali No. 9, Pandav Nagar
12. Vardhaman Appartments, Mayur Vihar, Phase I Extension
13. Mayurdhwaj Appartments, IP Extension, Patparganj
14. Gali No. 4 (one stretch with 7 houses), Kishan Kunj Extension
15. Gali No. 4 (another stretch with 7 houses), Krishan Kunj Extension
16. Gali No. 5, A Block (12 houses), West Vinod Nagar
17. J, K, L and H pockets, Dilshad Garden
18. G, H, J blocks, Old Seemapuri
19. F-70 to 90 blocks, Dilshad Colony
20. Pratap khand, Jhilmil Colony
21. South Moti Bagh slum
22. Bengali Market
Nizamuddin and Dilshad Garden, which fall under south-east district have already been declared hotspots by the Delhi government, wherein rapid antibody tests will be carried out on a mass scale as recommended by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR).
Some of these areas had already been contained since 31 March. In some cases, a lane has been sealed even where a single case was reported since these are congested lanes. 
A containment zone, as a Delhi official explained, is one where the aim is to prevent or contain the spread of the virus. A hotspot is an area where perhaps high number cases have already been reported. “However, whatever term we may use, the fact remains these areas will be sealed,” added the official requesting anonymity. 
As on Thursday, the total number of  coronavirus cases in Delhi rose to 669, with 93 fresh cases reported in a day, according to the Delhi health department. 
(With PTI inputs)
Also read: Kejriwal meeting with Delhi BJP MPs turns into blame game on tracing Tablighi Jamaat members
 
