Rahul, Tharoor on Modi-Trump, Anurag Kashyap’s Wasseypur-style jibe, Pooja Bhatt’s cartoon
New Delhi: The Modi government partially lifted the blanket ban on the export of the drug hydroxychloroquine Monday, which is regarded as a suitable treatment for novel coronavirus. Matters were complicated by the reported ‘threat’ from US President Donald Trump about possible “retaliation” if India did not accede to his request for the medicine made two days ago. This sent Twitter into a tizzy.
Former Congress President Rahul Gandhi tries to keep everyone happy with this tweet.
‘मित्रों’ में प्रतिशोध की भावना? भारत को सभी देशों की सहायता के लिए तैयार रहना चाहिए लेकिन सबसे पहले जान बचाने की सभी दवाइयाँ और उपकरण अपने देश के कोने-कोने तक पहुँचना अनिवार्य है। pic.twitter.com/RMk8lHHsO1
— Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) April 7, 2020
Filmmaker Anurag Kashyap, in a very Gangs of Wasseypur style, takes a dig at Modi’s decision.
चाचू की यह हिम्मत कि वो ताऊ बनने की कोशिश करें !!!! पप्पा को ग़ुस्सा आया ना तो बस …..
— Anurag Kashyap (@anuragkashyap72) April 7, 2020
Was US President Donald Trump issuing an empty threat to India for his own reasons? Retired Major Gaurav Arya certainly seems to think so.
When Modi has already agreed to do all he can, why does @realDonaldTrump threaten retaliation? OPTICS.
Getting the drug from India is not enough. To his local red neck voter base, he must look like a strongman who arm twisted India. Grow up @POTUS 🤡https://t.co/VI4hg2IRIn
— Major Gaurav Arya (Retd) (@majorgauravarya) April 7, 2020

Former actor and director Pooja Bhatt also joins the fun.
A friend in need is a friend indeed? #USA #India #FriendshipGoals pic.twitter.com/KfaYzWnNK1
— Pooja Bhatt (@PoojaB1972) April 7, 2020
BJP Rajya Sabha MP Subramanian Swamy has his say, too.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Our stocks of HCQ would at best be for 1.5 lakh patients. If our patientsrise to 5 lakhs, then is it wise to export?
— Subramanian Swamy (@Swamy39) April 7, 2020
And then there’s Congress MP Shashi Tharoor, who thought that in his years of experience in world affairs he had seen it all. But Trump proved him wrong.
Never in my decades of experience in world affairs have I heard a Head of State or Govt openly threatening another like this. What makes Indian hydroxychloroquine "our supply", Mr President? It only becomes your supply when India decides to sell it to you. @USAndIndia https://t.co/zvSPEysTNf
— Shashi Tharoor (@ShashiTharoor) April 7, 2020

Meanwhile, BJP’s Amit Malviya prefers to make the light of the situation. Read how.
Yesterday’s Power Grid experts are today’s Hydroxychloroquine experts 😃
— Amit Malviya (@amitmalviya) April 7, 2020

Moving on, here are Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal’s five “Ts” to combat the deadly virus in the capital
Delhi's 5 Ts to fight COVID-19:
Testing Tracing TreatmentTeamworkTracking & Monitoring
No stone will be left unturned to protect the people of Delhi#DelhiFightsCorona
— Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) April 7, 2020

BJP’s National General Secretary Ram Madhav, on the other hand, is more preoccupied with how South Koreans are handling the Covid-19 crisis.
Admire d resilience of South Korean people. They saw d worst outbreak of Coronavirus a few weeks ago. But now bounced back and preparing to hold elections for 300-member national parliament on 15 April. 13-day campaign has kickstarted n campaigners r following social distance etc
— Ram Madhav (@rammadhavbjp) April 7, 2020
And National Conference leader Omar Abdullah wants People’s Democratic Party (PDP) chief Mehbooba Mufti to be set free from detention. Mufti was shifted to her residence Tuesday but continues to remain under detention.
. @MehboobaMufti must be set free. Shifting her home while continuing to keep her detained is a cop out.
— Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) April 7, 2020
The usually jovial Sanjay Jha, Congress’ national spokesperson, gets serious. Here’s his point-wise suggestion on how the government should draft the the post-lockdown plan.
Post #Lockdown could be:
1) Rank states by risk profile
2) Zone in on hotspots within each state
3) Quarantine red zones after building continuous food/medical supply protocol for them
4) Ensure 24/7 medical/retail stores for all
5) Allow offices/factories open alternate days
— Sanjay Jha (@JhaSanjay) April 7, 2020
Author Dr. David Frawley reminds us to be mindful of our relationship with nature this World Health Day.
On this #WorldHealthDay we must consider the health of all humanity and the wellbeing of the entire planet together. We cannot live in isolation from nature or out of harmony with the cosmos and find happiness. Let us embrace the universal dharma of unity with all!
— Dr David Frawley (@davidfrawleyved) April 7, 2020
And lastly, Prime Minister Narendra Modi asks British Prime Minister Boris Johnson, who is in the ICU battling the virus, to “hang in there”.
Hang in there, Prime Minister @BorisJohnson!  Hope to see you out of hospital and in perfect health very soon.
— Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) April 6, 2020

-With inputs by Fiza Jha.
