Use homoeopathy, Unani to prevent deadly new coronavirus — Modi govt’s advice
Modi govt advises homoeopathy, Unani to prevent coronavirus that has no known cure yet
The Ministry of AYUSH has issued an advisory for the “prevention” of infection from the novel strain of coronavirus using homoeopathy, and “symptomatic management” using Unani medicines, reports Sandhya Ramesh.
Sharjeel Imam, the IIT graduate in JNU who called out Left’s ‘Islamophobia’
Sharjeel Imam gained traction over the past month for being a vocal critic of the CAA and an initial organiser of the Shaheen Bagh protests in the national capital. Born and brought up in the Jehanabad district of Bihar, Imam’s childhood was spent amid books. Read Fatima Khan‘s report to know more about him.
Ayodhya, Article 370, triple talaq done, these are the next things on Modi-Shah’s agenda
The NRC, population stabilisation policy and government welfare programmes for Muslims and minority education institutions are set to form the BJP’s core agenda in future. One can count on the BJP to steamroll the opposition, which has been diffident on the CAA-NRC issue and remained quiet on the other two, writes D.K.Singh
India’s civil judges and judicial magistrates are too young, lack life experiences: Report
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
A report released by think-tank Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy has found that civil judges and judicial magistrates in India are too young and, consequently, lack “significant life experiences”. The report also called for a debate on whether the country wants young candidates being appointed to this “crucial office”, reports Apoorva Mandhani.
Padma awardee Muslim teacher ‘fears for life’ in Mamata’s Bengal, calls CAA protesters actors
The Modi government has awarded Kazi Masum Akhtar the Padma Shri in the fields of literature and education. But the 49-year-old teacher and author, one of the five Padma awardees this year from West Bengal, says he fears for his life. Akhtar was assaulted in 2015 for asking his madrasa students to sing the national anthem, and claims the ruling TMC is protecting the perpetrators, reports Madhuparna Das.
The Mayawati era is over. Bye Bye Behenji
Last week, more than a thousand workers of the Bahujan Samaj Party in Basti district of eastern Uttar Pradesh quit and joined the Samajwadi Party. This is no big deal, sympathisers of Mayawati’s Bahujan Samaj Party might say. But it’s different this time. Mayawati’s supporters and voters are no longer sure if Mayawati still commands the unquestioned loyalty of Dalit voters, writes Shivam Vij.
