Film, TV bodies resolve insurance, salary issues to make way for shooting resumption
Mumbai: Federation of Western India Cine Employees (FWICE), Cine And TV Artistes’ Association (CINTAA) and the Indian Film and TV Producers’ Council (IFTPC) on Thursday said they have “amicably resolved” issues regarding insurance cover and salary for their members to restart filming activities immediately.
Last month, Maharashtra government allowed shooting of films, TV serials and web series with certain conditions.
All the production activities in the city were suspended in mid-March in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic.
There were reports that CINTAA and FWICE called off shootings of some TV shows, which were scheduled to start from Tuesday, after IFTPC failed to meet their demands for insurance cover.
In a virtual meeting held among the three bodies, IFTPC agreed to provide two sets of insurance coverage.
A death cover of Rs 25 lakh due to COVID-19 and hospitalisation cover of Rs 2 lakh will be provided uniformly across all hierarchy of the cast and crew.
“Apart from the insurance, IFTPC also assured that every precautions as per the government’s guidelines will be put in place to ensure utmost safety for the entire cast and crew,” read a joint statement from the bodies.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The 90-day cycle for payment in the TV industry has often come under scanner with many in the industry asking for it to be done away with, especially amid the coronavirus pandemic.
In the meeting, a decision was also taken to reduce the period of credit for cast and crew from existing 90 days to 30 days for at least the first three months.
“Mutually negotiated pay cuts without actors facing any sanctions, and continued dialogue with all parties for easing working conditions were also agreed to, without delaying the resumption of shootings.
“IFTPC acknowledged the contributions of CINTAA and FWICE who in these extraordinary situations showed exemplary understanding and maturity in the workers and the national interest,” the statement read.
IFTPC, CINTAA, FWICE and the broadcasters announced that the shooting will now begin immediately.
