Modi’s ‘gumchha’ swagger, Bhupesh Baghel’s couplet & Meenakshi Lekhi’s caption game
New Delhi: From taking lessons from Nazi Germany to giving it back to the Chinese Bollywood style, Twitter was in the mood for some good ol’ schooling.
First, however, politics: looks like Congress leader and former Madhya Pradesh chief minister Kamal Nath is still fuming over the coup within his government in March. Here, he reacts sharply to the expansion of the BJP state cabinet.
लोकतंत्र के इतिहास में मध्यप्रदेश का मंत्रिमंडल ऐसा मंत्रिमंडल है , जिसमें कुल 33 मंत्रियो में से 14 वर्तमान में विधायक ही नहीं है।यह संवैधानिक व्यवस्थाओं के साथ बड़ा खिलवाड़ है।प्रदेश की जनता के साथ मज़ाक है।
— Office Of Kamal Nath (@OfficeOfKNath) July 2, 2020

Trinamool Congress MP Mahua Moitra comments on propaganda with this quote – wonder if Mamata Banerjee has read it…
pic.twitter.com/NY5OrXXlmF
— Mahua Moitra (@MahuaMoitra) June 30, 2020

BJP MP Meenakshi Lekhi plays ‘caption this’ with India’s not-so-friendly neighbours. Do have a go.
Please title this picture . For me it’s 3..Neighbours pic.twitter.com/0swMyeteq2
— Meenakashi Lekhi (@M_Lekhi) July 1, 2020

We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Here’s BJP’s Sambit Patra on the ‘vultures’ who attacked him, a day after his controversial tweet on the photograph of a 3-year-old boy in Kashmir sitting on his grandfather’s corpse.
सारे गिद्ध आज इकट्ठे हुए थे …नोच खाने के लिएमगर गिद्धों याद रखो हम अभी मरे नहीं है ..ज़िंदा है ..ये नया भारत है ..इस में नुतन प्राण शक्ति है ..इसे तुम नोच नहीं सकते।
— Sambit Patra (@sambitswaraj) July 1, 2020

Data analyst James Wilson redirects attention to the coronavirus with these worrying statistics.
India's #COVID19 trajectory
        1 to 1 lakh cases:  139 days1 lakh to 2 lakh cases:   16 days2 lakh to 3 lakh cases:   11 days3 lakh to 4 lakh cases:     9 days4 lakh to 5 lakh cases:     7 days
Graph plotted with our lockdown and unlock dates & infection data pic.twitter.com/7NSmGHEIEo
— James Wilson (@jamewils) June 27, 2020

After Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra was asked to leave her New Delhi house by the Centre, the party’s spokesperson Pawan Khera blames ‘Headline Management’.
Governance by #HeadlineManagement  
चीन को करारा जबाब देने की जगह,विपक्ष को दिया जा रहा है 
चीन से भारत की ज़मीन खाली कराने की जगह विपक्ष के नेताओं के बंगले खाली कराए जा रहे है
— Pawan Khera (@Pawankhera) July 1, 2020

And, Chhattisgarh Chief Minister Bhupesh Bhagel offers his views in a couplet.
भले कहते रहो कि तुमको डर नहीं लगतातुम्हारे माथे का पसीना, हकीकत का बयां है#PriyankaGandhi
— Bhupesh Baghel (@bhupeshbaghel) July 1, 2020

Zomato gets a long overdue thank you from guess who?
Look ma, made it to a Lay's packet 😍 https://t.co/Vy6gmWjnEZ
— Zomato (@ZomatoIN) July 2, 2020

Is Merriam-Webster having an identity crisis?
Yep. English is literally dead. https://t.co/hGVXeSNDV7
— Merriam-Webster (@MerriamWebster) July 1, 2020

Next up, a delightful interview from BBC News that you wouldn’t want to miss.
ABSOLUTE SCENES ON THE BBC NEWS CHANNEL pic.twitter.com/hvu9iWkkIz
— Scott Bryan (@scottygb) July 1, 2020

And lastly, BJP’s Tajinder Pal Singh Bagga is so taken with PM Modi’s style, he has set this video clip to music—a must watch.
😎😎😎 pic.twitter.com/ONHxfQntGC
