This is how Modi govt plans to help MGNREGA workers during Covid-19 lockdown
New Delhi: To protect the rural poor from the economic impact of the coronavirus outbreak, the Narendra Modi government has decided to expedite the transfer of cash under the Direct Benefits Transfer (DBT) scheme while laying emphasis on ‘individual asset creation’ under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA).
The move is part of a series of measures the government is initiating to provide relief to those people whose livelihood will take a hit due to the 21-day lockdown, announced by Prime Minister Tuesday.
Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman had also said Tuesday the government is readying a relief package for sectors reeling under the impact of the coronavirus outbreak.
“An order was issued on Friday to expedite all pending payments under DBT for this financial year (2019-20). We have started the process using all alternate digital payment instruments including the Unified Payment Interface,” a senior official in the DBT Mission told ThePrint.
Currently, over 400 central government schemes have been brought under the DBT platform.
Also read: Use hydroxychloroquine with caution: ICMR warns amid confusion over use of drug for Covid-19
Starting Wednesday, the rural development ministry will also start clearing the backlog of MGNREGA wages and material assets that have been created. In the current fiscal, there are 8 crore job holders registered under MGNREGA.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“On Monday, Parliament approved our second supplementary demand for grants to the tune of Rs 5,000 crore. This will be used to clear the delayed wages of workers by 31 March,” a second government official said.
To ensure that the lockdown does not impact the livelihood of the rural poor, the Union rural development ministry has also told states to focus on giving work involving “individual asset creation” that require maximum four to five workers.
Under MGNREGA, individual asset creation involves building farm ponds, digging wells, horticulture-related activities among others.
“This involves up to a maximum of four to five workers and can easily be carried out while practising social distancing,” said the second official quoted earlier.
This, the official added, will ensure the worker has his livelihood even during this period of public health crisis.
The ministry, however, is yet to take a call on Jharkhand Chief Minister Hemant Soren’s demand seeking more funds from the Centre to pay unemployment allowance to labourers. Under the MGNREGA, a person is entitled to the allowance if he or she is not allotted work within 15 days of demand.
Also read: Coronavirus pandemic is ominous news for India’s rabi crops and farm-to-food chain
On Tuesday, the Union labour ministry also issued an advisory to chief ministers of states and lieutenant governors of union territories, directing them to transfer funds into the accounts of construction workers through DBT mode from the cess fund collected by the labour welfare boards.
About Rs 52,000 crore is available as cess fund and about 3.5 crore construction workers are registered with these welfare boards.
On Monday, the government had also allowed states to collect food grains on credit from the Food Corporation of India, for a period of three months.
Also read: Doctors turn to social media to develop Covid-19 treatments in real time
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Ham deroj jar hai Hamare  pas koe naukari nah i hai kir Pa ya hamari mad at kare  Ham Bihari  hai
Amrita devi aadhar number 623895753428 Acount  no.36426451057 IFC code SBIN0002991
Please help me sir have no job help me sir Account no 20409562355 Ifsc code SBIN0000085 Please help me sir
