Ram Temple trust chief, who attended bhoomi pujan with PM Modi, tests positive for Covid
New Delhi: Nritya Gopal Das, the chief of Ram Janmabhoomi Teerth Kshetra Trust, which is overseeing the construction of the temple in Ayodhya, has tested positive for the novel coronavirus, the Uttar Pradesh government said Thursday.
Das had on 5 August shared the stage with Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath and UP Governor Anandiben Patel, among others, during the Ram Mandir bhoomi pujan ceremony in Ayodhya.
Uttar Pradesh Additional Chief Secretary Awanish Awasthi Thursday said the chief minister has taken note of the trust chief’s positive test.
“He (chief minister) has spoken to the Mathura District Magistrate (S.R. Mishra), his (Das’s) followers and to Dr Naresh Trehan of Medanta Hospital and requested immediate medical attention for Mahantji,” Awasthi said. “He has directed DM Mathura to provide all possible support for providing best possible medical attention.”
Also read: No selfies, 8-ft distance — how Ayodhya is preparing to shield PM Modi from coronavirus
Das, who is also the president of Krishna Janambhoomi Nyas, was in Mathura to take part in the Janmashtami celebrations when he tested positive.
According to Mathura district officials, doctors have told them that he is running a mild fever and has been given medication.
According to a senior official, Das complained of breathlessness following which a test was conducted and he was found positive. A team of doctors is monitoring his situation.
“We got information that Maharajji had a fever and immediately a team of doctors was sent and they carried out all medical investigations and he was given medicine,” DM Mishra said.
“Fever is normal now but he had complained of breathlessness. Corona test was done, antigen and there is an indication of corona. The honourable CM has been constantly taking information from us. He also called us and said he (Das) should be shifted to Medanta. We will shift him there. In the present situation, he is completely stable but for better treatment we are shifting him there.”
It is not clear at the moment what action PM Modi will take in the wake of this development. Asked if the PM, who attended the bhoomi pujan along with Das in Ayodhya, will quarantine himself, PMO spokesperson V. Ravi Rama Krishna said they have not heard anything on the matter so far.
Also read: Ram Mandir can’t wait for Covid vaccine. Modi is Hindutva leader first, India’s PM later
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
Why news media is in crisis & How you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And have just turned three.
