‘Aasha ka diya’, ‘distant yet together’ — how prime time news marked 9 mins, 9 pm
New Delhi: Prime time debates Sunday didn’t have any debates — the light of 1.3 billion or so lights illumined all studios, and news anchors, on their very best behaviour, spread the message of togetherness.
A fortnight after thali bajao, Modi’s ‘diya jalaao’ (light diyas) request to the nation at 9 pm for 9 minutes was observed — bringing breathtaking video footage of scenes from across the country.
TV anchors preached the message of solidarity. ‘Light for India’ said CNN News 18, “We are distant but we are together,” intoned Arnab Goswami (Republic TV). “We are all socially distanced but emotionally connected,” agreed Navika Kumar (Times Now).On Zee News, Aditi Tyagi announced, “Aaj bharat ne haar nahi maani. Nirasha par aasha ki jeet,” (Today, India didn’t give up. Hope trumped disappointment.)
Some news channels gave a rousing call for the lights to extinguish the dreaded virus: ‘Corona zaroor harega’ (Corona will lose) declared India TV. 
Channels like Republic TV and News Nation saw the entire staff in the studios switch off the lights and switch on their mobile phone torches — in a show of solidarity.
Others did not personally observe the 9 baje 9 minute power shutdown — but observed everyone taking part in it. They showed us ministers, governors and Baba Ramdev lighting the lamps, as well as the public.
ABP News’ anchor Rubika Liyaquat explained to her viewers before 9 pm, “Diwali manani hai lekin lakshman rekha mai reh kar” (celebrate Diwali but within the confines of your house).
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Liyaquat continued her running commentary during the 9 minutes: “Ameeri aur gareebi side par rakh di. Sab ek saath hai.” (The rich and poor celebrated together. Everyone came together).
Soon after 9.09 pm, Liyaquat concluded with some rare insight, “Koi bhi location badal dijiye, ek hi tarah ka manzar dikhayi degai” (You can look at any location, but all the cities looked the same in celebration).

Aaj Tak brought live coverage from different cities — singer Kailash Kher had been invited to speak during the coverage: “India is the land of saints and sages. There is a lot of charge in this country.” Ok, Mr Kher.

NDTV 24×7 brought a more sobering angle to the proceedings: it had reports about how people across cities truly believed it was Diwali and were bursting crackers —  this was “not ideal”, said the anchor.
Arnab Goswami conducted a conversation with Sadhguru minutes before 9 pm. Sadhguru explained, “This is not about lighting a lamp, it is about coming together beyond caste, creed and political parties.”
At 9 pm, Goswami showed his newsroom lit up with mobile torches: “We will pledge to win against those doubters”, he said.
“We request you to pick up the light and drown out the pessimism,” he continued.

While watching coverage from different cities celebrating this “early Diwali”, Times Now’s Navika Kumar said, “What is gratifying is that people are not breaking the lockdown. The symbolism for which each citizen is standing is heartwarming.”
