Karnataka govt panel says no medical reason to continue lockdown, seeks phased withdrawal
Bengaluru: A high-powered expert committee appointed by the Karnataka government to chalk out an exit plan for the 21-day lockdown has said there is “no medical reason” to continue it beyond 14 April, when it’s scheduled to end. 
Headed by Dr Devi Shetty, the founder of Bengaluru-based Narayana Hrudayalaya, a chain of hospitals, the panel has recommended lifting the lockdown in phases while continuing prohibitory orders in “hotspots” (areas with multiple cases) with strict policing.
“The government should plan a phased exit at 2-weekly intervals. Covid-19 is a three-month-old disease and there is no precedence (sic) of standards to follow,” the report, accessed by ThePrint, states.
“No one can predict the ground realities at the end of two weeks, so let’s design the action plan for 2 weeks from 15 April to 30 April, 2020,” it adds. 
The five-member panel submitted its report to the Karnataka government Wednesday evening. An official in the Karnataka Chief Minister’s Office said the panel’s suggestions were being taken into consideration by the B.S. Yediyurappa cabinet and a decision will be arrived at by Thursday. 
However, state Health Minister B. Sriramulu has thrown his weight behind the idea of an extended lockdown, telling ThePrint that the Covid-19 situation in the state is still not under control. 
Also Read: Modi must not extend lockdown. Economy won’t survive on ventilator for long
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
According to the panel, lifting the lockdown in a phase-wise manner will instil confidence among people, prevent public frustration and secure livelihoods.
It has asked information technology and business technology firms and other commercial establishments to encourage work from home, while allowing 50 per cent of the workforce to return to offices. 
“Encourage industries in the organised sector to reopen and function at 50 per cent while every employee gets paid fully. Construction industry should also be encouraged to resume…” the report states. 
The panel has noted how the lockdown left thousands of migrant workers stranded in the state with no income or food, adding, “Declaring lockdown of a specific industry for a long period of time will result in layoffs compounding the economic problems.” 
Other recommendations include: 
While a decision on the panel report is yet awaited, Sriramulu has said the lockdown must be extended. 
“Coronavirus is not under control yet. The number of cases and those infected has been increasing day by day,” he added. “We should take a cue from Punjab, which has recommended an extended lockdown. It will help in the long run to control the situation.”
By Thursday, Karnataka had registered 181 cases of Covid-19, of which five have died.   
Also Read: Modi tells MPs lockdown only way to curb Covid-19 spread, hints at extension beyond 14 April
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Central as well as state receive donations. What they do with that?
  Have any idea? Sir use that money for those who struck (rescue them) safely sent them there Homes, look in to labour class people provide some food, some places absolutely this going on, I thank and appreciate there work for each individual’s, but certain areas still they are waiting with hunger. So my humble request to central government approach to those people, and that’s your priority.
  Keeping silence is not a solution, and addressing to people with words won’t feel there needs..
  Take necessary measurements chronic illness patients, it doesn’t affect lockdown or delayed treatment, They suffering from illness.
  Our Moto should be Safety of all our Nation people..
    Stay home stay safe… Than only our Nation Safe…
Lockdown should continue in a state with increased medical test like door to door check up by municipal authority with the help of police and NGO
 Second petrol should banned for common people
Third banks should work on alternative days with 50 percent staff specially rural and urban branches
Well, what about middle class and low class people ? Should they die because of hunger ?
Well let them extend lockdown but are you feeding poor and needy ? The daily wage guys ?
Most of the people are stuck in other places atleast they should be allowed to move back to their place with their own transportation.. you can close public transport but atleast through personal transportation we should be allowed to move back.. atleast two days relaxation is a must
Testing is not fool proof,
Medication is important and should be successful
New Cases are still coming up,if the lockdown is lifted,there ll be a surge,why the govt wants to play with the lives of people, Can’t they see the situation in  US and other such countries who didn’t put the lockdown properly.
lock down should be FURTHER
EXTENDED NEW CASES HAVE NOT STOPPED AND ARE COMING ON DAILY BASIS..
BUT IMMEDIATE ACTION TO
WIN THE  BATTLE AND TO CONTAIN COVID19 SPREAD
MUST BE TAKEN ALL SUFFERING COUNTRIES
UNITE AND PUNISH THECULPRIT COUNTRY
Good
