‘Do you want to reduce India’s population?’ Salman Khan calls out lockdown violators
New Delhi: Bollywood actor Salman Khan has slammed people who he said are still venturing out and thereby putting others’ lives at risk when a lockdown has been enforced across India to check the spread of Covid-19.
In a 10-minute video posted on Instagram Wednesday, Khan spoke about the plight of Covid-19 patients and said it was “extremely anti-human” to not understand their pain.
The actor shared the video from his farmhouse in Panvel, Maharashtra, where he has been staying with his mother Salma Khan, sisters Alvira Khan and Arpita Khan Sharma, brother-in-law Aayush Sharma, nephew Ahil and some close friends.


A post shared by Salman Khan (@beingsalmankhan) on Apr 15, 2020 at 11:07am PDT

In the clip, he also called out a friend who had “removed his mask” while stepping out to buy ration.
“Maine unse kaha ki ye jo aapko mana kiya gaya tha karne ko wahi aapne kiya (I told him that he did what he was exactly asked not to do),” the actor can be heard saying.
As of Thursday (16 April), India has over 12, 000 confirmed Covid-19 cases and as many as 414 deaths.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: Dear Deepika, mothers & wives who put family’s dreams first deserve an apology not an ode
The Dabangg actor made special mention of police personnel and doctors who have been putting their lives at risk to protect others.
Khan spoke against incidents of stone-pelting on healthcare workers and police officers.
His video came on a day a group of doctors and policemen were attacked in Uttar Pradesh’s Moradabad district when they tried to escort family members of a person who died of Covid-19 to a quarantine facility.
“Doctors aur nurses apki jaan bachane k liye aaye aur aapne unhi par patthar barsa diya!…Agar ye doctor initiative nahi lete aur police sadako par nahi utarti toh chand logo ki wajah se…wo Hindustan ke aadhe logo ko leke chal baste (You are pelting with stones the doctors and nurses who are trying to save lives…If doctors hadn’t taken initiative to treat Covid-19 patients and the police personnel didn’t patrol the roads, then because of a few people…they would have died along with half of the India’s population),” he said.
The Moradabad incident is only one among many others. Covid-19 healthcare workers were also attacked in Indore, one of the worst coronavirus affected cities in India. Earlier this week, a Punjab policeman’s hand was severed when a group of Nihang Sikhs allegedly attacked a group of officers with swords.
Khan said that people who wished to harm and “kill their families” have been stepping out of their homes even in this grim situation.
“India ki aabadi ko kam karna chahte ho? (you want to reduce the population of India?) Starting with your own family?” Khan asked.
This isn’t the first time that the actor has tried to create awareness about the Covid-19 crisis through his social media handle.
On 5 April, Khan shared a video post with his nephew Nirvan, urging fans to stay at home. “You remember the film dialogue, ‘jo darr gaya woh mar gaya’, (the one who’s scared, dies)…it does not apply in this situation. We are terrified and bravely, we admit that.”
In another video Sunday, Khan recreated a romantic scene from his movie Maine Pyar Kiya adding a coronavirus twist to it.
Also read: Kabir Khan’s new show on Netaji’s INA will ask questions about history and idea of India
