Times Now, Republic attack Rahul for Pulitzer comment & Sudhir Chaudhary’s ‘sharaab’ woes
Prime time Tuesday, saw some news anchors on Times Now, Republic TV and News 18 worked up over Congress leader Rahul Gandhi and his apparent ‘backing’ of Pakistan’s line after he congratulated Kashmiri journalists for winning the Pulitzer prize. They had a problem with the citation in the Pulitzer prize that referred to Jammu and Kashmir as a ‘contested territory’.
Others were feeling rather judgemental about citizens rushing out to buy alcohol after the shops opened post lockdown.
News18’s anchor Amish Devgan announced, “Mahine bhar ki chupi ke baad, Congress ne diya zordaar siyasi vaar. Sakshatkar ke zariye Rahul Gandhi ne kiya sarkar par hamla.” (After a month of silence, Congress has attacked the government. Through an interview with an expert, Rahul Gandhi has attacked the government). This was a reference to the video chat Gandhi held with Noble prize winning economist Abhijit Banerjee Tuesday morning.
Devgan decided to impart his gyaan on the issue, “BJP aur Congress dono se kehna chahta hoon, yeh raajneeti nahi, desh ko coronavirus par sahi ranniti ki zaroorat hai.” (I want to tell both the Congress and the BJP, this isn’t the time for politics. India needs a good strategy against coronavirus). Is anybody listening?
Zee News’ anchor Sudhir Chaudhary seems to love false equivalences, “Croreon logon ki naukriyan jaa rahi hai, lekin sharaab khareedne ke paisa aa kaha se rahe hai,” (Crores of people are losing their jobs, but where are they getting the money to buy alcohol from?).
Wait on, there’s more: “Aisi linein toh 2016 mein demonetisation ke time par hi dekhi thi,” (These kinds of lines were only witnessed during the time of demonetisation in 2016), Chaudhary said. He continued to argue that people were concerned about standing in lines during demonetisation, but they don’t seem to care as much when buying alcohol.

We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
India TV’s Rajat Sharma was also very unhappy with the long lines in front of alcohol shops. Sharma said, “Corona ka darr nahi hai, sharaab ki tadap hai,” (People are not scared of coronavirus, they are addicted to alcohol).
He continued, “Sharaab ke shaukeen ko koi taakat nahi rok sakti, coronavirus kya cheez hai,” (People who like alcohol can’t be stopped, not even by coronavirus).
Sharma was surprised to discover women in ghunghats had bought alcohol from shops in Rajasthan. What’s the surprise, Mr Sharma?
Times Now anchor Navika Kumar was back on her favourite target, Congress. Kumar said, “Congress now wades into the air fare debate. As usual, it has problems with air fares and has called them inhumane.” She referred to the cost of tickets for Indians who want to return home on special flights arranged by the government.
Kumar was annoyed and asked political analyst Tehseen Poonawalla, “What’s your problem? Why does the Congress have a problem with everything?”
Isn’t that the Opposition’s role, Ms Kumar?
Poonawalla quoted some statistics, “From the World Bank, India has received Rs 7,000 crore, from ADB 15,000 crore, from IMF Rs 30,000 crore and PM Cares fund has over Rs 15,000 crores.”
He then asked, rather rudely, “What is the PM spending money on? On building a mansion for himself?”

Republic TV’s anchor Arnab Goswami also attacked Rahul Gandhi. Goswami said, “Gandhi has formally endorsed Pakistan’s line on Kashmir.”
“When Pulitzer says India revoked Kashmir’s independence, Rahul Gandhi gave a thumbs up to this theory,” he continued.
Goswami felt that Rahul needed to apologise, “This is at a time when we’re battling Covid on the one hand and Pakistan on the other.”
India Today’s Rajdeep Sardesai brought the focus back to the migrant workers. He said their problems remain, “While many of them have begun to head back home, coordination among states has resulted in a lot of confusion.”
He continued, “The city with the largest number of migrants is Mumbai, yet no train has left the city. Migrants are getting increasingly desperate, they are lining up in hundreds to finish formalities like basic medical checkups for which they are having to pay.”

Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
