It’s time our expectations got real — there could be an economic tsunami around the corner
Forget the details, what is the big picture? First, Covid is going to end up much bigger than most people might have expected. India is about to overtake China in the total number of cases, at about 84,000 — something that was once a very distant prospect. After all, there were barely 500 cases in India at the start of the first lockdown less than eight weeks ago, when China’s number was already over 80,000.
The government tracks the doubling rate and sees a slowing down, but it’s not nearly slow enough. We have seen three doublings, i.e. an eight-fold increase, over the last 32 days. Assuming the doubling rate slows further, and there are less than two doublings over the next 50 days (say by early July), we could well see a tally of around 300,000. That would place India among the top four Covid-hit countries, behind the US, Russia, and Brazil — none of them models for their response to Covid-19. If this outcome is to be averted, what we need to see is not doubling but the daily tally of cases peaking and then beginning to fall.
If the business of doubling continues, be prepared for bad news not just from the perspective of the coming medical challenge but also for the economy, which will take longer to return to anything resembling normalcy. As with the havoc potential of an unchecked Covid epidemic, most people also underestimate the related economic impact. Forecasters are still fiddling with positive growth numbers for this financial year. And the stock market continues to react to short-term news. Both discount the possibility of a tsunami that may be round the corner. If the experts say that the right comparison for what we are living through is with what happened in the Great Depression, then it is time our expectations of the future got less unreal.
Also read: Govt lockdown package frees farmers from mandi monopoly, strips essentials of stock limits
Meanwhile, there is nothing intrinsically wrong with the two sets of measures that the finance minister announced this past week, except with the method of totting up the size of the “stimulus” on offer — even tax refunds are listed, as though they are government largesse. The measures themselves are broadly in line with what most people have advocated, but they are sensibly or cleverly (depending on your point of view) designed to minimise the actual outlay of central government money. Also, little has been done to improve state governments’ spending ability. Even without foreseeing any shadow between announcement and execution, the limits of government capacity are evident.
The starkest figure that the finance minister mentioned on Thursday was 80 million migrants taking shelter in places provided by governments and civil society, a number so startling as to boggle the mind. That so many can be provided with temporary shelter is in itself heroic; that they will all soon be fed, as promised, makes it even more so. And yet, what Nirmala Sitharaman is able to offer the poor and migrants seems pitifully small. It is inevitable that many millions will be left to fend for themselves. In the absence of many work options in rural areas, and given the collapse of the government’s make-work programme, we face the prospect of those millions slipping back into poverty.
Finally, a thought about the private sector employers who are clamouring for government action to bring back missing workers. Surely they must take some responsibility for so many of their workers being willing to take long treks to the uncertainties of village homes that they had left in search of work in the first place. It says something about how employers have abandoned these millions, and taken no responsibility for creating a sense of either shared fortunes or mutual belonging. To then cheer state governments that have arbitrarily and without consultation scrapped labour laws only adds insult to injury. As one observer has commented, the answer to problematic laws is not lawlessness. Besides, governments that act arbitrarily could be looked at askance by sought-after investors, who might wonder if they will be at the receiving end of similar arbitrariness tomorrow (as they have been in the past).
Also read: Modi govt’s ‘One Nation One Ration Card’ is same UPA scheme that Sonia-led NAC shot down
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Sitharaman is like a doctor who tells her patient to eat almonds and do yoga for next 6 months sothat he will be healthy and will not need medicine. But the patient is suffering from fever and body ache. He needs medicine now.  so the patient request that he may be given medicine as he does not have money to buy almonds for next six months.  Sitharaman tells him that she has waived her fees. That means patient has saved lot of money. he can use that money to buy almonds. ….   ( F.O.)
