India TV works out, Amish Devgan on Pak’s ‘pitaayi’ by India & Gaurav Sawant at China LoC
New Delhi: The ‘face-off’ between Indian and Chinese soldiers in Naku La, Sikkim, the infamy of Pakistan, the plight of migrant workers, looking after the elderly and a spot of exercise– all this and more Sunday prime time.
Some news anchors also pondered Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s upcoming meeting with chief ministers Monday.
However, News18 India’s anchor Amish Devgan had something completely different on his mind — “Pakistan aatank se baaz nahi aayega iss corona kal mein aur bharat uski pitayi karega,” (Pakistan will not shy away from terror in the time of corona and India will beat it).
This was possibly in reference to the recent debate that has been raked up around Pakistan-occupied Kashmir after the Indian government placed PoK regions under the Indian Meteorological Department’s Jammu and Kashmir sub-division, in what is being termed as a ‘weather war’ between India and Pakistan.
Devgan got a little carried away with the news — “Modi sarkar ne niyat pichle 6 saalon mein saaf kardi. Pakistan chilaata reh gaya, bharat ne Article 370 ek jhatke mein hata diya…Gilgit-Balochistan aur PoK ki vaapsi Bharat ka agla lakshya hai aur hona bhi chahiye,” (Modi’s government has done all the work in six years. Pakistan kept screaming but India removed Article 370 in one stroke…. occupying Gilgit-Balochistan and PoK is India’s next goal and that is how it ought to be).

India TV was back on its fitness mantra, and anchors Sushant B. Sinha and Meenakshi Joshi brought the viewers a ‘chota gym’ (small gym).
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“Humne yahan chota gym tayaar kiya hai taaki logon ko spasht ho jaaye ki jo gym mein karte the woh hi yog se ho sakta hai,” (We have brought you a small gym so you realise that yoga can achieve the same as gymming).
And then, unsurprisingly, yoga guru Baba Ramdev was called onto the show for some warm-up tips. His professional advice was —  “Dorna shuru kar dijiye bina treadmill ke,” (Start running without the treadmill).
The next thing you know, the two TV anchors started jogging on the spot, on live television, with a koel chirping in the background. We cannot make this up, even if we tried.
Ramdev, for his part, was very encouraging —“Jitna fast bhaag sakte hai utna fast kar lijiye,” (Run as fast as you can).
But Sinha had his own troubles, “Agar itni fast bhaaga toh mic nikal jaayega,” (If I run this fast, then the mic will fall). Puff, puff…

Zee News’ anchor Aditi Tyagi was preoccupied with something more serious: Migrant workers.
She described them thus, “Aapne sadak par ya daftar jaate samein kisi aadmi ko sar par bhoj lekar dekha hoga, ya mahila ko apne bacche ka haath thame chappal pehn kar sadak ke kinare dekha hoga,” (You must have seen on the road or while going to office, a man carrying a load on his head or a woman carrying a child in her arms wearing chappals).
Tyagi spoke feelingly about their condition. “Koi din aisa nahi gaya jab inn mazdooron ki tasveer na aayi. Mazdooron ki kahaani sirf ek hai, usme sirf dard, dard aur dard hai,” (There hasn’t been a day when these pictures of migrant workers hasn’t been published. The story of a migrant work is full of pain, pain and pain).
And then she got to the got ‘big question’ — “Humaare Hindustan mein mazdoor itna majdoor kyun hai,” (Why are our workers so helpless?). Isn’t that the question, Ms Tyagi?
NDTV 24×7 Sunday celebrated an initiative called ‘Save our seniors’. Among other celebrities, anchor Prannoy Roy spoke to filmmaker Karan Johar, who was most pleased with the initiative.
“I am really happy that you’re doing a show called save our elders. It’s what I believe in, I made a film where we had a timeline that said it’s all about loving your parents so it’s obvious that my emotional ethos are in that direction.”
He explained, “There will be a time when people who raised us will be weak emotionally, physically and we have to be there for them.”

On India Today, anchor Gaurav Sawant was more interested in the border skirmish between India and China.
“An intense face-off between the troops of India and China at the line of actual control in Naku La in North Sikkim. Of course now they have disengaged is what we’re told but fisticuffs were engaged,” he said.
Sawant told us “Remember, this is not normal at the line of actual control.”
Anchor Abhishek Bhalla also shared his insight, “Experts say that this is due to the fact that snow has melted and troop movement has increased and fortunately every time such a situation arose it was resolved amicably through a dialogue.”
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
