Reverse migration hits Chhattisgarh’s green zone status, over 150 new Covid cases reported
Raipur: Chhattisgarh’s status as a Covid-19 green zone is in jeopardy, due to a spurt in cases caused by reverse migration.
The total number of cases in the state went up to 214 on 23 May from 59 on 14 May, with the active number of cases rising to 150 from three. Chhattisgarh health department officials said some of the active cases found in this period have been discharged after two negative tests.
In total, the officials said, 170 (over 80 per cent) of the state’s overall positive cases are migrant workers who have returned, mainly from red zones in other states. Of the active cases, 140 are migrant workers from 17 largely rural districts.
The active cases are admitted at AIIMS, Raipur, as well as other Covid-designated hospitals.
Also read: BJP attacks Chhattisgarh govt for ‘hiding’ Covid data, Congress says it’s all loose talk
Before this spate of infections, Chhattisgarh had only two red zones, Raipur urban and Korba. But now, despite Raipur urban being reclassified as an orange zone, the number of red zones in the state has gone up to four.
According to a state government order dated 22 May, Daundilohara block of Balod district, Takhatpur and Masturi blocks of Bilaspur district and Korba block of the eponymous district are now red zones, while 82 blocks now fall under orange zones.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The state government has set up 67 containment zones in the 17 rural districts where returning migrants have been found Covid-positive. Around 1.5 lakh returning migrants have been quarantined in 18,730 centres in rural areas, while 44,184 people are in home quarantine.
Chhattisgarh Health Minister T.S. Singh Deo told ThePrint that the state government had anticipated that the situation could worsen when stranded migrants make their way back aboard the ‘Shramik Special’ trains run by the central government at the behest of the states.
“This was bound to happen, and the numbers might further increase. It’s not beyond our imagination, but we are prepared to face the challenge with the same might and impact as we have been doing since the first positive case surfaced in mid-March,” said Deo, who also heads panchayat and rural development departments.
Detailing the measures put in place by the government to combat the rise in cases, Deo said: “Apart from setting up quarantine centres in every panchayat across the state, government has also created more than 60 containment zones, all in rural areas. Health department officials and workers are holding door-to-door campaign with missionary zeal to identify migrant workers and others who have returned to their homes but failed to inform local government authorities mainly due to their ignorance.”
Chief Minister Bhupesh Baghel had earlier told ThePrint that the state would keep its border sealed “as long as there is a single Covid-positive case in the country”, and that states should be allowed to decide on how to ease restrictions.
Senior officials in the Chhattisgarh Covid-19 Command and Control Centre, though, claim that the situation is under control, though they do express concerns about those migrants who have either walked back home or hitched rides on trucks.
“Even though the number of cases is rising, the situation is well within our control as the travel history of these patients is on record and their sources of infection are known. What is worrying us are around 50,000 migrant workers whose details are not available with the government,” said Dr Akhilesh Tripathi, deputy director and data in-charge of the Command and Control Centre.
“If these workers remain untraceable and they start testing positive, it will lead to panic. In that case, all our hard work may prove insufficient.”
Tripathi added that the number of cases might spike further to the 1,000 mark as less than half of the 2.30 lakh migrant workers identified as Chhattisgarh natives have returned so far.
