Modi’s poorly planned lockdown won’t save us from coronavirus, but will kill economy
It is important to note that countries that have so far done a relatively good job of containing the coronavirus pandemic have refrained from imposing a complete, nation-wide, curfew-like lockdown. These include Singapore, Taiwan, Germany, and Turkey. Even China, where it all started, placed only the Hubei province under complete lockdown, not the whole country.
But Prime Minister Narendra Modi has put 1.3 billion people under a curfew-like lockdown. Since the authorities are using the word ‘curfew’ in the context of issuing passes, it is fair to call it a national curfew.
A national curfew for 21 days will definitely go a long way in reducing the transmission of the deadly virus. But what happens after 21 days? The virus won’t disappear after that. Not until we get a vaccine, and it will take at least a few months to vaccinate every Indian even after a vaccine has been developed. A few months is a very optimistic estimate. In other words, we are in this mess for years.
Like these other countries, India could also have avoided the need for a national lockdown had it done what those countries are doing: testing, testing, testing.
India’s 21-day national lockdown should thus be seen as buying time to create a massive testing infrastructure, so that even asymptomatic people could be tested and quarantined. That’s the only way to manage the coronavirus pandemic until we get drugs and vaccines to administer en masse.
Also read: Modi’s Covid-19 lockdown speech shows he doesn’t learn from past mistakes, or doesn’t care to
Sadly, Narendra Modi’s two national addresses have done little to address this concern about India not taking the mass-testing approach. We need fast testing, cheap testing, easily available testing — and a well laid out mechanism to quarantine a person the moment she is found positive, without letting her infect others, including medical staff and family members.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
You have to be really naive to believe India’s official numbers of coronavirus patients — and then there are those who have died of sudden pneumonia without being tested or counted as coronavirus deaths.
The lack of widespread testing, as well as the lack of PPEs (personal protective equipment) for doctors, is a scandal. These 21 days are Modi’s last chance to fix these two problems. The responsibility is his more than anyone else’s, but state governments will also be put to test.
Sadly, the evidence so far suggests that the Modi government does not have the capacity to think through the details of planning and execution. This is turning out to be another demonetisation, with the typical Modi problem of mistaking theatrics for achievement.
The deliverable is not how many people clanged pots and pans or how many obediently followed Modi’s advice of staying indoors. The deliverable is how many people got tested, how many doctors have protective gear, how many ventilators the government managed to manufacture or buy overnight. Another deliverable is isolation centres, temporary hospitals in indoor stadia and quarantine facilities that are fit for human beings.
Modi does not have the patience or the interest to deliver on these nitty-gritty details, he’s probably working on his next grandiose ‘address to the nation’ to be applauded for his oratory. He will leave the tough things to state governments and focus on the right optics to sustain his political ratings through a tough period.
Also read: India’s perfectly-timed lockdown & wartime efforts to find Covid-19 cure
If we survive the pandemic, we won’t survive the impending economic collapse. The economy isn’t on Modi’s radar either. He won a national election despite disastrous economic policies that gave us a 45 year-high unemployment rate. Why should he worry about the economy?
Demonetisation and GST resulted in killing demand, and this poorly planned national curfew will kill supply chains. We’ll be left with the great Indian discovery, the zero.
Modi announced a national curfew with little notice. He addressed India at 8 pm, and the curfew came into force at midnight. Just like demonetisation. Why couldn’t he have given some notice? Why couldn’t he have done his TV address at 8 am? Maximising prime time attention, you see.
The home ministry issued a list of exemptions but try explaining them to the cops on the street. The Indian police is doing what it loves to do the most: beating up Indians with lathis. Meanwhile, lakhs of trucks are stranded on state borders. Supply chains for the most essential items have been disrupted, including medicines, milk, groceries, food and newspaper deliveries. Nobody in the prime minister’s office seems to be aware of any such thing as crop harvesting, or the Rabi season, as farmers wonder how they’ll do it amid this national curfew. Only Modi can manage to be so clever as to disrupt the country’s medical supply chain while fighting a pandemic.
Modi is the only major world leader who has not yet announced a financial package. In his first speech, he said the finance minister will head a committee, but some in the finance ministry said they heard of this committee from the PM’s speech. He did announce Rs 15,000 crore extra to meet the health expenditure arising out of the Coronavirus crisis — that is Rs 5,000 crore less than the amount of money he has kept aside for his narcissistic and unnecessary project of rebuilding the Central Vista of New Delhi.
At this rate, more Indians might die of hunger than of coronavirus. Modi’s poor administrative skills, zero attention span for details, and preference for oratory over governance spell disaster for this crisis. In a few weeks, we might find ourselves overwhelmed with an epidemic in defiance of official numbers, while the economy might start looking like the 1980s.
The author is contributing editor to ThePrint. Views are personal.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
I appreciate the writer for his out of the way observation. At the same time I m really sad to read the comments of various people which mostly condemned the writer nd his views. With due respect to all the comments from the readers who have the right to express their views, I wud like to differ from those people who took this article in the negative light. I wud like highlight a few points in support of my views. First In India I have seen there is a tradition of personality worship ‘vyakti puja’ which is feel is very harmful to the health of our mother nation. Whether be it Mahatma Gandhi, Ambedkar,Nehru, Indira Gandhi, Rajiv Gandhi, and many other political leaders to today Narendrabhai Modi, we  start looking them as demi gods who can never do mistakes nd does not like to hear anything against them.. let me tell you this is worst thing you can do to your country. Because no individual is above country nd its interest nd we should have a clear unbiased judgement on their their thought nd action without any prejudice. Indian lacks in a big way as we make every leader a Demi god nd then stop evaluating his work and instead keep on blindly singing praises because for us what is done does not matter but who has done matter; similarly what is said does not matter but who has said matters. This creates a unhealthy atmosphere for democracy.
My few questions regarding the lockdown:
1. Why started with entire country full lockdown nd then gradually reducing it when there rise in cases. They said they wanted time to get ready but for getting ready one has shut the entire country.?Even localised lockdown could has served the purpose of restricting its spread.
2. Why suddenly allowed the workers to migrate after two months of lockdown. If it wud have been done earlier, the current scenario wud have something else.. because states like Assam, Bengal, Bihar; Rajasthan, HP, etc saw heaven rise after workers started migrating.
3. Why seal Mumbai suddenly rather why people was not allowed to leave Mumbai in initial phase, the scenario would have been different. Mumbai could have been saved. And also other places.
To all readers Kindly refrain from reading and believing such articles.  Please see the current numbers  and compare it with any other nation impacted by Corona. Please note the recovery rate of more than 50 % in india is due excellent infrastructure set up by this government and we should salute our all health workers whoa re working day night for the treatment of corona patinet.
This author of this article is definitely out of sense and not practical.  Better to ignore such article which is not worth taking seriously.
Some people can say that our Prime minister Shri Narendra Modi has done nothing but remember that today we are being highlighted because of Modi ji. Every country is appreciating us that our Prime minister has imposed lockdown on a very correct time. In this difficult time we have come out as a ray of hope. First correct your analysis and stop criticising.
Some people can say that  P.M.  Modi has done nothing he is the culprit for everything but remember today our country has become an example  in this difficult time there is a ray of hope and that is because of Modi . Every country is appreciating us that our prime minister has imposed lock down on a very correct time . He launched the Arogya setu app for our convenience actually safety . Before writing you should go through the analysis . Stop criticizing.
Modi’s nationwide lockdown was a disaster. The poorest among us suffer; they don’t even have basic necessities. Why isn’t Modi building new hospitals or at least providing beds for covid patients. Why is it so difficult to get tested even after the lockdown? Weren’t there any plans for mass testing? All the hospitals don’t have enough capacity to test even people with symptoms. As the coronavirus case is rising everyday, Modi is washing his hands from responsibility, passing the responsibility to the States. 
Launching a mobile app in the midst of a pandemic is not even in the top 10 things we can do to fight the virus and prevent the spread.
Since Freedom @ Midnight India has ignored its poor. 65-70 years of misrule and missed opportunities by successive PMs and govts. has left modern Indians with almost non-existent infrastructure to meet even usual needs. Despite our boasts, we have no vision as a nation, our people are hooked on ‘instant’ gratification and plagued by a corrupt mindset from top to bottom that allows the powerful to pocket the loot. No way you implement these basic needs in such a short time now.
It’s easy for all to criticise, but no one has presented a detailed plan for every aspect of this challenge. The Opposition have all the time in the world – and the money they’ve accumulated over the decades of hoarding – but even they have not given any constructive suggestions. Anyone can throw stones, but to take the stones you have and give them to the builder to build a house is what’s ultimately useful for all.
Brainless and shameless are passing the bucks
What example has India set,  building a statue of unity from tax payers money or farmers killing themselves at all time high rate or unemployment or decline in real estate or an upcoming recession…  Leader is not about talks but action, all midi has done is just taken some great pictures and sent India back to 1950 S…  Pls use ur brains people
THE PRINT WAS RIGHT SUCKERS! JUST PROVE ANYTHINF WRONG WHICH THEY PREDICTED EARLIER! …SUCH A STUPID POPULATION… SO MANY STUPID PEOPLE IN ONE PLACE!  WILL KEEP SUPPORTING THEIR LEADER EVEN IF HE MURDERS THEIR FAMILY!
THE LEVEL OF STUPIDITY IN THE COMMENT SECTION IS WAY WORSER THAN A MENTALLY UNSTABLE DONKEY! I GUESS THE COMMON MAN HAS LOST THE COMMON SENSE! THIS WAS MEANT TO HAPPEN WITH SUCH A STUPID POPULATION..
Tell me one thing who was prepared for this epidemic even the countries that are considered as global leader are suffering from and there losses are a lot higher then what INDIA is facing today. I don’t know where you get this “journalism skills” where u don’t see the bigger picture no can be prepared and no can plan for this epidemic and please don’t worry about economy if  the whole INDIA together can follow the lockdown and I’m sure the same INDIAN together can boost the economy. The global economy is struggling and that also effect us there is no way we can shelter ourselves from that. What is better Living people around us or some numbers on some sheet.
He said totally right Iam fully agreed to him  why  Modi sir extended lockdown instead it could not save us from getting infected so, I want that he should open everything  what ever it’s results in future and actually 1-2lakh people would died then what get wrong …got it
Lockdown wasn’t meant to stop corona virus… It was implemented so that our healthcare system could  prepare to cope with the peak time unlike US and Italy where the healthcare was overwhelmed in the 2-3 weeks only.
He said totally right Iam fully agreed to him  why  Modi sir extended lockdown instead it could not save us from getting infected so, I want that he should open everything  what ever it’s results in future and actually 1-2lakh people would died then what get wrong …got it
This kind of publishers only want rebels to get a greedy essence for there articles. 
They are even worse than dogs (atleast dogs knows royalty)
I don’t want to take side of bjp but this articles is truly rubbish. They should know the fact that how hard is to control the population of 1.3 billion having different aspects and mind state. 
Yes the decision of lockdown is not 100% perfect but in this situation what else can be doned (publisher of this article is single minded one).
This time Modi captured everything and BJP occupied every media , even election commissioner and everything is occupied by MOdi…it is looks very danger for country. Every body will die one by one Govt will speak lies in TV and social media along the supported . people will die without food ?  this time we need to think about Nation ….instead of praising Modi …………..the print i salute you for your brave article .
Don’t be a andha bhakt of Modi like the godi ones.
100% correct article. Searched to see this. Indeed poorly planned lockdown. See now they have opened inter state travel with local doctor certificate that one who is traveling is not suffering from covid like symptoms. I guess one can obtain such certificate with 50/- in India. Forms are available in PDF on police website, one has to download print fill and submit, see they are assuming stranded people have printers at home. Lockdown is failure because people still come out for essential items and get infected. I’m sure this government can at least now say they tried. But deep down in my heart I know this government fooled people successfully.
“The Print” is an Anti India media house. It always publishes nonsense & tries to turn people into – Anti Govt… Anti BJP. There r some more corrupt media houses like this which have been assigned this job. There r some liberals also who are doing this kind of work for spreading hate & make people fight with each other. 
In sabko ye pata hai ki –
Hindustan main Kutton ko bhaunkne ki azaadi mili hui hai. 
Hindustan main kutton ko bhi maara nahi jaata.
Agar himmat ho to China, middle east, russia, US, Europe jao aur aaise articles publish karke dikhao.
We all must ban these type of media houses & liberals trying to create unrest in society.
Amit Gandhi, you should be ashamed of yourself.  Just because you are an educated prick, who does not possess the capacity of thinking through, we cannot accept the fact that announcing a national lockdown with no notice will only make things worse. 
Please get admission to a primary school and educate yourself first.
Mr. Intelligent, I totally support you. We should have been told months earlier and given the chance to go to our homes back and carry that virus along with us to make our elderly who are more vulnerable sick and also it would have flooded market in an unthinkable way . I know you read an english newspaper and maybe have even a better knowledge than me of this language but let us not think that liberals are correct just because they are intelligent. Those people who call themselves intelligent like these liberals are most foolish. That is why doctors and IITians of this rarely speak on foolish things but when they speak they sound sensible and not liberal.
Kya krte phir Corona del mar jaante sahi time pe lockdown Kiya to dikkat nhi krte to dikkat
Too true. This kind of publishers only want rebels to get a greedy essence for there articles. 
Well Said bro..
But they are even worse than dogs (atleast dogs knows royalty)
I don’t want to take side of bjp but this articles is truly rubbish. They should know the fact that how hard is to control the population of 1.3 billion having different aspects and mind state. 
Yes the decision of lockdown is not 100% perfect but in this situation what else can be doned (publisher of this article is single minded one).
This kind of publishers only want rebels to get a greedy essence for there articles. 
They are even worse than dogs (atleast dogs knows royalty)
I don’t want to take side of bjp but this articles is truly rubbish. They should know the fact that how hard is to control the population of 1.3 billion having different aspects and mind state. 
Yes the decision of lockdown is not 100% perfect but in this situation what else can be doned (publisher of this article is single minded one).
Mr.amit…this is the time you should look the worst situation of india . Instead  of praising modi Bjp now we need to see the nation. rade country is first and modi is lier > in my life first time i seen a low standard , 4rth grade PM. …all the news chanel aaj tak, zee news,  r epublic,  abp news,india has occupied by Modi most  news chanel speaking lies and supporting MOdi.  No one worry abpout poor and migrant labours…..people are dying without food…..shame on MOdi and d grade Govt.
100 % TRUE,  Modi Misleading India , People will understand this later and regrate.
Ha..tu karle manage…nahi to tere abbu Pappu ko se kara le…
Lol our so called Pappu predicted all of this trouble earlier in February when modi was busy with Namaste Trump.  If he was Pm all of this wouldn’t be happening in the first place!
Dedo Bhai… Isse toh 1000 guna accha manage kr Lenge..
Misleading…
It’s really sad to see a  media group being so biased. All the articles I read from theprint have the sole motive of spreading negativity about our current government. While I agree that all the decisions in the past were not the best, don’t you think its time we give some credit for the efforts.  I just wanted to ask do you, yourself agree with your views. Don’t you think you were too early to judge?  All the other countries not implementing the lockdown early are suffering.
PS:  Prime Minister Narendra Modi has the highest popularity among the global leaders as per a recent analysis done by pollster Morning Consult
Hitler also enjoyed the highest popularity before he ruined the country!!. The discussion here is governance and he is repeatedly failing. If you don’t see then there is nothing anyone can say or do for you. No country has done national lockdown. India was in a good position to lockdown the districts with cases and could have used its manpower efficiently and made sure it doesnt spread but instead the whole nation was lockedown with think resources and now we have corona in 240 districts.
Raj Sharma, Its people like you, who do not have the capacity of thinking things through. 
Tere jaise unpad log sirf media ko sunte hain samaghte nahin. And when responsible media like theprint tries to show you the truth you just can’t accept it. 
Because guess what, you are “modi”fied to stupidity.
you are true…we support the print media …brave and best media….modi can not buy ..because he already captured many news chanel and media . and news chanel worshiping day and night with full praising ….think about india not Modi
What a Corrupted Minded article.
Completely Rotten Views of People Wanting to see the Government of India Fail & Indian Die  all around …. so that the article  writer & similar minded can Beat Their Chests .. Saying .. We Told You So.
Atleast Modi Ji is doing something unlike the person who has written this article
This time every News media is supporting Modi and many people here fearing MOdi ? …this is brave article …i thankful for this article…..the print is not aaj tak  , zee news  , and other modi praising chanel ?
My precious time wasted reading this article. Maybe someday even the author will realize the same. My advice to the author is Instead of writing this post could have become a volunteer and helped at least 1 person in need would have been worth.
this is so true instead of your negativity you can help someone
It is this negativity that is hurting the nation the most. Let us realize this at least during a pandemic. 
Let there be some direction, right or wrong, instead of floating around and searching for the best solution and not getting it. Past attitudes be forgotten for the pandemic. When everything is indefinite about the pandemic, how does one say that this  is right and that is wrong.
The basic tent of democracy is discipline. This is one thing which we are totally lacking. Can you be coaxed into discipline? Is asking too much but no adhering to it,  the only criterion of a democracy?  Or, have the Britishers left over the legacy even of begging for discipline?
No one has the capacity as of now to save this country. Govt. does not have money to give state’s share of
GST.  People of India , businesses and industries will suffer untold hardship and painful existence. No one in the present Govt. is worried about industries or Businesses getting closed.  For a Couple like India present or past financial wizards will not be able to do any turn around.  2 terms of this Govt. is only for screwing everything that is good and make people‘a life miserable for ever.  This era will be a total failure era except announcing some obituary references now and then.
Who’s going to give money? It’s not about economy it’s about life kuchnhi de rha h kya our dear pm.. really hating him now log mar rhe h bhuke
Fully misleading article, everyone knows the results of US, UK and Italy where they put economy first.
The only objective of “the print” is to oppose our PM. They are really hate spreaders. They are misleading public to make fail the government to come over Corona crisis.
Simple si baat hai “Him jinda rehenge to economy rehegi”.
Friends, you should keep peace. It must have been written by a Jamati🤣🤣🤣🤣
O bhai….
Apne hi apno se dhoka khaa lete hai…ek bhai dusre bhai ko kuch paiso ke liy khoon krdta hai or modi kia cheez hai….modi ko hate krne ka bht se kaaran hai ….isme konsi badi bat hai….
Isme religious hatred wali baate mention krne ka u dont hav ny rights…to point despite of ua own rlgn
Hi come on lockdown is no way to treat Corona, how the hell govt can stop healthy people not to work and stay home just because s few old will die?death is a part and parcel of life,every day thousands die due to road accidents,do we put lockdown on driving?No,because it’s irrational to do so,see present not future,if u feel healthy go to work ielse stay home let Drs do what they can, buy time to do something, once virus has inoculate d remotely by Chinese , now no one can do anything, it’s irreversible…..
Simple and plane , u have to accept it, the better u do it early it’s good, other wise u lose to hunger malnutrition job loss unemployment addiction and suicide or robberies…..  And get nothing in exchange for that .. a few lives? Is it worth it or just to hide our govt failure in stopping it enter our country? Hope everyone understands
This writer has no common sense.
Nonsense article .. utterly nonsense, maybe writing nonsense is the primary objective of the print
This Article said it 20 days back….sad but true
What ever gov did was the least they could do keeping in mind that we indians do not follow any hygiene and rules. The print as we know is left leaning I was expecting this type of article from print, wire
Writter has nicely stated his stupid thoughts and also proves he is inborn chutya.
Most of the people’s comments here are politics oriented rather than anything else.
I will speak as an Indian and when I say the mistake was done then it would mean that the mistake we (India) has made and not mistake the govt has done.
– Regarding the decision for lock down – On that particular day the decision we made was absolute correct and it was needed. That is the only way we are not in panic mode right now. I say “that particular day” because it was late reaction from us and we could have done better by scanning* flights or blocking flights starting from FEB end. This was our biggest mistake; WHO also can be blamed for not alerting everyone sooner.
*scanning: note that just checking for temperature is not same as scanning for coronavirus (covid-19).
– You are correct in saying testing is important. We need to test as much as possible. The lockdown I hope is the time we are buying to arrange for tests or beds and ventilators in case it gets worse.
Meanwhile, we should also look for medicine or cure which are there in our roots (probably Ayurveda).
– Another option we could try (probably after 30th April) is try for herd immunity. Instead of locking down everyone, let us start by isolating the older and weaker people in a small section and increase the area/range gradually depending on what results we get.
– Regarding the economy. We can think about it later because keeping people alive is the top priority right now. Yes, people are going to be hit and in my opinion the middle class and the lower middle class are going to be hit the max.
– Regarding police beating up few people on streets – Maybe a few were genuine cases and were not needed to be beaten but in general our cops did the right thing by bringing fear in to people who did not understand the magnitude of the situation or the meaning and importance of curfew.
I am sure Modi’s think tank must be more qualified to deal with such national emergencies than your magazine’s think tank. We are a country of over 130 crore people disorganized by culture, caste and demography. There’s no other way to limit the cases or at least restrict the growth rate. Trump must be regretting by going after advise of columnist like you. I agree daily wage workers would be in trouble, but at grass root level, many organizations are donating food and necessary items.  So I suggest rather than pointing out flaws in the system, you should better write on how to reach out to more and more needy people.
Wow. You sound super frustrated! If you need to vent, I’d suggest you get yourself a personal diary and pen down your ridiculous thoughts, rather than doing it on a public platform. Having an opinion is justified, but broadcasting negative views, inappropriate and under researched ideas is not appreciated at this time.
Listen to CNN, BBC, DW, HK even CGTN.
QUESTION THE LEADERS. THEY ARE YOUR ELECTED SERVANTS NOT MASTERS.
QUIT YOUR SLAVISH MENTALITY AND SHUN YOUR STOCKHOLM SYNDROME.
DOCTORS IN GOVT HOSPITALS ARE NOT ALLOWED TO TEST, LET ALONE TELL THE TRUTH TO MEDIA- CENSORED. NO FIFFERENT FROM CHINA, RUSSIA Etc.
We don’t change our attitude – esp religion based politics – don’t expect any change to at least a 2nd world country.
KERALA is a different level – religion couldn’t make a dent, don’t deliver and you are out.
Dont be like another BBC… your analysis is NOT exactly right and at these times this is an irresponsible journalism. You are telling the obvious smart moves but you seem to forget the context or may be you don’t know India.
The author is paid by traitors and anti-nationals to write this article and he has made a payoff to the Print to let this shitty article see the light of the day.
I know there are a lot of hardships faced due to the lockdown by various sections of the society including farmers and I am concerned a lot and have participated in food distribution to the poor and stranded. But this global occurrence is one in a first in a Millenium and the Govt has done what is best for one and all in the macro picture including our dear grandparents(though I don’t have one) and foolish Vij has taken this opportunity to betray his Prime minister.
Shame on him and the Print. Will never read the print ever.
stupid articles makes no sense usa was testing testing and testing but what happened? lockdown is and was necessary…  your full article is stupid just like you..   You talk about economy..  sales will sure went down even with lockdown or without it … author has everything but one thing is missing “common sense”
Utter Rubbish. Not based on facts but just opinion.  Theprint publishing such invalidated false articles at the time of the crisis is beyond acceptable. This would be my last visit to theprint.   RIP theprint.
Rubbish article. Waste of time.
Ache Din Aa Sakta Hai Apr 14 ke Baad.
Acche dinner Kabh Aate hai
Considering our population & health care system, there were two options.
Either save economy & let people die or save the people & kill the economy.
Unlike many other countries Modi choose to save lives .
Now don’t say that our health care system was at top till 2014 & it collapsed after 2014.
Atleast don’t write such rubbish articles in such situation when the country is facing lockdown. Because of such articles people are loosing faith in media.
I wish The Print would comee out with some suggestions as to hove to overcome this Virus instead of criticizing  al, the time .
Just 1 quick question to the the author n the portal , if such is the case wat u wrote , why is the UN n WHO praising India for the way we did the lockdown ????
U think u guys have more credentials then them !!!
#stayhome n #shutthefuckup
The title of this piece should have been – “My toxic, poisonous venomous hate for modi has found new words. Here they are”
An snakish idiot pretending to be an expert should be sued for cheating and misleading people
Modi is zero in public administration and disaster management.and as usual no bjpians know about economics.
You moron! It is idiots like you who doesnt obey a PM’s request. Dont blame Modi for that. BTW theprint.in is a leftist media! No doubt it is a Modi basher!
Instead of thanking Modi for being brave enough to call the shots unlike other leaders, this guy is criticizing the move mainly due to getting paid for it by the Left to encourage public and secondly coz the PM is wise enough not to disclose further action and create more panic.
Look at our population, hygiene level and compare the global cases count.
Yeah rahul Gandhi know a lot.Ashok gehlot knows a lot.Stop this facade that it’s about governance .It was always religion and political dominance.Glad BJP is playing it.They are here for 10 years
As usual these guys Modi / Shah and Nirmala don’t have any knowledge on Public Administration and Economics.
And now suddenly this came actually they don’t know what to do and also they will never listen to the secretaries who have knowledge in this . They only hear from some of the people who are always favour to them.
Indian economic policies are already absurd but in this pandemic situation this was the right step taken , these type of ill educated and mentally biased writers are writing illogical things, how can you plan a response to ongoing epidemic? these paid media houses are sponsored to spread hate news. The writer is illogical mentally unstable and probably a failure in constructive work in his life.
Hope the writer reads the comment only then it makes sense to show him how disgusting are his thoughts and inclination to demean the work of govt just for the sake of money
This can be paid propaganda only and writer should be banned
ya sure he should be banned. How could he write the truth in front of these idiots. Idiots like u who ignore the truth
what do you expect from a news portal that publish the opinions of a mechanical engineer on coronavirus just because his name started with dr. (he has a phd). please dr. doesn’t always mean doctor.
We will be burried islam and communism right here don’t worry byproduct of  islamic rape.
Send this writer to hospital. His brain is malfunctioning  due to Coronavirus
What hunger are you talking about man,essential services are still open ..Supermarts are open from 8 to 5 Pm. How will ppl die of hunger ??..Even after announcing a lockdown cases have been steadily rising ,if not for the lockdown imagine what would have happened?
You privileged middle class  f00l. Ask the poor. They don’t  go to super markets. They don’t have income.  But mf like would not care. Just wait when these poor and hungry souls will had enough  and start raiding houses privileged middle class. Let’s see then.
Yeah this are just petty excuses losers like you give.You people have no substance.Since you have not achieved anything personally you come here remove your frustration on people .since in real life you will dare not do this and go with tail in between your legs.No personal accomplishment, No girlfriend, Low self esteem that why the jealousy. Take in writing you can’t do shit to rich  people like Ambani.By the way he was also poor but didn’t crib like you.poor fellow
I sympathize with your situation. Have a heart.world still has place for poor idiots like you
It is true that Modi did not planned properly the lockdown, but at the same time Corona has also not given him advance notice & enough time to do proper lockdown plan. Request you please don’t blame him. Whatever he did is for save the nation. “Jan hainto jahan hai” economy bapas laya ja sakta hain but not life.
The irrational and hasty  decision of lockdown will kill many daily wage earners and poor people  in India, forget about the economy.
Really shocked to see some comments in favour of the lockdown or rather in favour of
Modi.Can’t they all see poor are suffering LOCKDOWN IS A PRIVILEGE FOR RICH BUT NOT FOR THE POOR.
Can’t you see what’s happening in europian countries and the  powerful mammoth USA. They have infected them selfs due to delay in response. Only a sudden lockdown for 1.30 billion population county  helped us in controlling the pandemic spread.
The ah reporter is using india with tiny populated, developed nation with better economic situation for this comparison…These f..S just hate modi nothing else…What a shitty report..Every big boys ass whopped by virus…He want India’s..Too.
Sir if PM would have planned and executed it by giving some time to the people this rush wudn’t have hit the borders of states. Though indian ppl are uneducated but they are humans they will react according to the situation, in such a short period of time with no such announcement of how everday wagers will be relieved, they got the panic attack, didn’t you run for the grocery stock filling for next 21 days.. The ppl dont have money,  food stored grocery..  They planned to leave to their villages & now this will end up in huge disaster, this mop will be the live bombs & gonna explode in near future. Now when ppl have crossed miles of distances the govt is taking responsibility for them. Borders are sealed for them poor people are stuck..  Not every person hates modiji..  Few just like him & still understand that his administration is failing & falling.
Well would the virus had given time saying “Oh they have just announced a lockdown, let them get the essential supplies once everything they ng is in place I will start spreading” isn’t it?
Do you know what a lick down is and why it’s being done?
Repeating my point mentioned in some of the replies so far, for fellow citizens to think “a bit”. Feel you were in some sort of isolation so far. Nobody requires millions of examples to show the govt.’s incompetency. Just one – when more nations started picking up infections in the first week of March (Italy, Spain, Singapore etc.) and when few nations started sourcing testing kits (South Korea, Japan etc.) to test their citizens, we stood “under-prepared”, selling social media accounts on Women’s Day. Good day to you, sir.
Thank you for not thinking much.
When the whole world was panicking on what to do next, we had a dynamic PM Modi, who swung into action by taking the first major step – banning all internationals flights into the country. He was the first world leader to do so and that decision  indeed bore fruits as all the people who were evacuated later by Air India were sent to quarantine centres. The whole world then followed suit with Gulf countries then starting to ban all flights. It takes sheer guts to take such decisions as 21-day lockdown of the world’s second most populated country – but for a man who is known for decisive actions – be it the surgical strikes and the Balakot bombing, this should not be surprising. And Abhi, this was done for all Indians including you. But if you still have some good ideas why don’t you share it with the ‘Italian mother and spoilt brat’ so that they can help their beloved country from the daily record deaths. If you can’t think positively and hail our PM’s timely decision or contribute something to the nation, then its better to keep your mouth shut than spewing venom.
Before India, Poland cancelled all international flights so don’t say that India did first. There are many better leaders before modi and now also in other countries.
Friends I failed to understand what solutions we are expecting from arguing against each other. The fact is that this particular disease spreads human to human and it’s sign is not visible immediately. The very purpose of lock down is to keep people intact at one place and in case any such symptoms arises it will be easier to trace and quarantine that particular family. But if people are allowed to move freely that God knows where the chain will end. We will soon find huge population at a time being infected and the govt will be left with no resources but to allow it’s citizens to die. So it’s always wise to follow lock down as sky is not falling on our head. Let govt takes enough measures to arrange foods for the poor. I hope soon we will overcome this problem and if reqd we will work 24 hrs for next two years to recover all the losses. Don’t panic cooperate with the administration. Hardship will come but will disappear soon. Stay home be safe.
Shivam has ‘NOT JUST CRITICISED’ – but put valid points which could have been done by PM.
1. Some time OUGHT TO HAVE BEEN GIVEN before ABRUPT LOCKDOWN. Gradual lockdown within a few days of restrictions, impending lockdown signals – like was done before STOPPING INTERNATIONAL FLIGHTS TO INDIA. 
2. Persons living singly, elderly or otherwise, staying out of homeplace with no support – whole load of other categories – are absolutely stranded, uncertainly long – COULD VERY WELL HAVE BEN AVOIDED LARGELY, if not fully.
3. US – despite the highest affected (positive), has refrained from lockdown. Other measures like border crossing quarantining, strict travel advisories, testings,other measures are in place – BUT NO SCOPE FOR LOCKDOWN.
4. a) Restricting international visitors/flights, 100% monitoring testing strict quarantining of  already arrived persons traced a period 10-15 days prior to lockdown – creating adequate infrastructure for QT, testing, treatment 
b) Extensive testing of local areas – housing, on roads , travel points & modes. Results bearing deep impact on control  path forward.
c) Condition based restrictions
 – like deep interior villages, no penetration of virus, strict restrictions unnecessary for within village
– high risk areas including major cities & linked areas to have curfew restrictions
followed by many countries including US, Germany, France.
More such measures OUGHT TO HAVE COMPULSORILY BEEN APPLIED, BEFORE INSTANT LOCKDOWN.
Various points mentioned by Shivam Vij are ‘absolutely perfect’
– our SO VERY VERY HONEST cops, just never fail to be at their best to bully, beat mercilessly the helpless public
– PM not concerned- total disregard to  public helplessness as above, or for long effects of Demonetising drama –  without bothering to EVEN THINK of preparatory actions, forget about taking them – currently & in Demonetising – deep individual ego overriding everything else. (Nautanki is not wrong word).
Strong alround preparations ( adequate time was ‘very very well available’ from the time Issue implication awareness known’,  from the day WHO declared Pandemic etc), reasonable notice prior to national lockdown (if at all mandatory nationwide), OUGHT TO HAVE BEEN DONE instead of current state abruptly imposed mindlessly – results overall would have been reasonably optimal.
Real sick explanation for an absurd article.
irony of India has been these paid piece of shit.no matter how the grave situation is India in these Libtards want to have there shit always eaten by
criticizing Indian govt.look at Italy,Spain,USA whats happening there.people are dying everywhere.These immediate lock down could actually prove to be blessing in disguise for India.”Ghanta economy” look at your Paagal didis west bengal how good its economy is..Paid Loosers
If anyone speak truth bhakt look them as anti modi even anti national.government ko to sirf bhasan dene matlab hai.aaj rat 12 baje se……..koi plan to tha nahi inlogo ke pass.jo bhi ho hum hi logo ne aise logo ko banaya hai.ye so raha tha jab chaina me virus tha.airoplane ko 🔐 kui nahi kia.fligh bhej kar bahar se virus mangaya.aur aaj inke pas magraint labour ke liye kuch nahi train bhi nahi.dhup me paidal chal rahe hai log aur bhuk se mar rahe hai.ye kaisa doglapan hai bhai.dear bhakt naraj nahi hona.nahi kuch yad hai to demonetization bala bhasan bhi sun lena
Shivam Vij for people like you my grandfather, who was a simple farmer in my hometown of begusarai, invented a word called “******”। I am a doctor and I am surprised to read such an ill informed article which  provokes people by fear mongering. In every Viral/bacterial prone disease there is a incubation and gestation period here its 14+3 days, 21 days followed properly will indeed halt the spread.
Dont create our lives hell and Print please dont post such useless opinions.
So do you think that economy will be safe and everything will be alright after this lockdown?
The number of people who down in India are 1,000 x higher than those infected by Covid-19.  The global spread is clearly exacerbated at moderate latitudes, which are still in winter / spring. The weather & environmental factors in areas that are hot & humid parts of India, have clearly shown for centuries that the fly does not affect such lands as it does in Europe, Japan, China or N.America. Shutting down all of India, a massive land as a precaution is akin to sawing off your arm to prevent it from touching your face. Its a massive country – you cannot apply half planned blanket lockdowns over 1.3 Billion people without severe repercussions. Just like a heat wave in France does not order a shut down in Tasmania – one cannot order all-encompassing, severe, destructive lockdown on a whim & fancy with no planning or preparation as Modi seems to do always. The BJP won a mandate twice over for promises to take the nation far ahead into the future with innovation, manufacturing, smart cities, collaboration. Modi delivered zilch. The policy of impulsive actions & impulsive proclamations has not gone unnoticed. They have to be removed from office. Get them out before they grind it to dust, it’s over for them, out they go.
OMG!  This is so basic sir..  Doctors know the science & theory about the incubation period & else others have nil knowledge about it all they know that this is virus & it’s killing,  & by this midnight there’s curfew,  there will be no work so i’ll have no money means no food,  if PN WOULD’VE SAID/MENTIONED THAT there will be the proper arrangements of food & shelter for the wagers, the ppl might have shown less frightened reaction. Planning me kami reh gyi h modiji k.. Calculation sahi se betha nahi paye pm sir..
https://www.linkedin.com/posts/manoj-nakra-97128b8_shutdown-spotlights-economic-cost-of-saving-activity-6649212695163830272-ksPZ
Read and rewrite your piece.
Such articles are glaring examples of seeing everything negative in whatever good modi & his administration is doing
for public welfare.
Sorry for this journo. Arm chair impractical nut. Let him give an answer to this case study – https://www.linkedin.com/posts/manoj-nakra-97128b8_shutdown-spotlights-economic-cost-of-saving-activity-6649212695163830272-ksPZ
Very well written!
Its sometimes a shame, that the replies aren’t to the point and are mostly curse words.
The article only gets more validation in that case. But a fitting logical reply with explanations is the best way to approach this!
Well sai.  But do you really believe a Bhakt will ever get into a logical discussion and use sane language? The only response can be, paid troll, please ignore!
It us idiots like you who must educate yourselves. Do you think the virus comes with a warning that any government can first ensure everyone has all that they need, are all at home, so that Modi could have come to you and said in your ears: “Okay now  Pidhi, at the count of 3 go home and  rest and don’t come out for the next 21 days. Okay baboo?”
All you inbred left journalists and sympathisers grow fat sitting on your armchair doing “cholshhe na, cholbe na” and think you have the answer to everything.
Idiotic, ill informed, biased,  badly written,illogical.
Whatever you ate smoking is certainly not agreeing with you.
bull shit… always spitting against this govt and the nation…. without any concrete idea… sometimes  I feel these types of media should be treated like what China does……..
very true. There is a conspiracy   playing within a group of Political parties and media to criticize each and every act of the government and show the government as a bad one , purposefully . but they forget that in there doing so the effected one is the public and the country not the PM or BJP.  Shame on these people.
Can someone give me proper reply of my question-
* if covid 19 is same for everyone.every people of india.. then why government of india give permission to  grocery shop & some shope to open.. they are not human beings .? Its trape . Their is much more behind these.. senetisers and masks are not working well.. &public will enfect eachother in many village.. they are roming all over here & their. This is not good way to care or cure ..who will be responsible for this. this is very careless.. give me some response .. i m wrong or right.
In hindi-
haa or mere hisab se to ye islie kiyaa gyaa he k government pr load naa aae.. khane pine ka saman gav or village tak dene kaa.. or sb ki jarurat bhi puri hoti rhe jab ap sbko hath jod jod kr bol skte he ghr se bhar na nikle na nikle.. to ye dukan wale kyaa insan nhi he kya.. ye khi or duniya se aae h kyaa.. kyaa in logo ki care nhi he.. sare grahk dukano m ek dusre se chipak kar khade he .. na jane wo kaha kaha se aae he.. khi dusri states me majduri kr k aae h.. inme se kon infected he kon nhi .. hme kese pata hogaa.. or jab ye log bhi bhar nikl k dukan khol skte h to kis bat ka lockdown or curfew.. iska mtlb to khtra nhi h na. Sb log aram s bhar nikl k ghum skte h .. kyu fir police wale unko danda mara rhe h.. le deke sidha sa meraa yhi kehna he ki agr ap rules banante ho to sbhi k lie hona chaiye.. usme apka fayeda na chupa ho.. ap ese koisi team bhi la skte ho jo sbhi ko anaj .. gehu.. cahawl.. ya khana provide karae.. sochana he to sbhi k bare m soche.. janhit m jari . Or ha agr m galt hu to us bat pr bhi ap log mujhe reply kr skte h
Why dont u give example of what happened in italy, spain, Netherlands nd US….what price they had to pay for not issuing lockdown orders nd make people follow it. And you are talking about tests…do u know of the situation in holland…they dont have enough to test all nd people are said that only if u would be in very critical situation then come for test…there are not enough ventilators nd masks with them…so u wanted it to spread in india a country with huge population nd then when there would be so many cases you would get a chance to blame modi that he took too long to take the initiative of lockdown etc….
😉
Let us compare apples to apples in weather & environmental factors. Compare India to Kenya, Brazil, Indonesia or South Africa – how many of these nations went into total lockdown? How many seem to be suffering right now? None.
All those who are fulminating against Shivam Vij are playing into his hands.
I am not against Vij or The Print. They are simply trying to grab maximum eyeballs.
Real fools are those  who  give satisfaction to Vij by commenting on his article.
More the number of comments more his Brand value.
Now tell me who is bigger sucker.
That’s true.That buffon also know this.Hell I feel the people who comment here can write much better articles that this buffoon.
It is remarkable how little effort is made to counter Shivam’s points in the comments, just vitriol.  As if pouring abuse is the equivalent of reasoned argument.  This is what one would have expected from Modi-bhakts, of course, and they have not disappointed.  But the truth must be told, so well done Shivam!  The lockdown, like demonetisation, is part of a disturbing feature of the Modi government where important policy decisions are taken with no prior warning and no thought for the consequences.  Shivam is right: the government took this decision in haste and is now scrambling to deal with the consequences.
It is foolish to comment on stupid people
then why are you doing it?
So True.. Now what’s going on? when things are out of order, they are announcing  packages god knows when these packages will be provided to them. This should have done on the day of announcing lock down,
I have faith in my Government and Modi ji. They will save India from any debacle.
Ha ha …. It’s clearly seems that you are anti Modi, nothing at all. But I must say that instead of thinking of the he human kind you have used your intelligence to waste your time and write a lengthy article just to pinpoint the fault of our Government. I feel shame that instead of coming forward and doing something for the society you are doing this.
First of all, please be clear …. The Hubei is the province where the virus originated, hence China was able to secure the boundaries of Hubei and put it under Lockdown. But hope you know it well that China put the domestic transportation under Lockdown but kept open the International space and sea for transportation and public travel. Which made it sure that the nuisance virus was able to spread itself from Wuhan/Hubei to various parts of the world, whereas it didn’t spread in China as the Hubei boundary were secured.
Lateron the so called intelligent and educated Indians like you who were living around the Globe made themselves the carrier of this virus into India. Many of these idiots even used Paracetamol to keep their temperature under control and bypass the Indian security at Airport. This is just disgusting.
Where is the Indian Government’s fault in all this and you are blaming it for downfall of economy. If the people will perish and who will live to see the booking economy.
Please first of all, always try to discuss the issue with your team and allow others to raise their point. Please do listen to others before saying anything about Government. The Government of India since independence have always thought about it’s people.
The reason of national Lockdown is because the virus came to India from all the airport across India.
This is what I feel today. The supply chain is broken tell this to a cop and they doesn’t understand. Its not lock down its seriously curfew. Economic disaster is looming.
When you question government you get answers from their fellow supporters
What can you expect
Print doing great work and is asking questions to government is sin.
It is a negative article. At this critical stage one need to be positive and contribute ,if not keep shut as more you negative comments will discourage the right doer. 
Time is short. Right way is to support the cause and contribute.
What else can be expected from “the Print”. One may not agree with govt decision than suggest what to do. Mere you hate modi, you blam all policies.
This is not an article, It must be tagged as “Rubish”
Auther needs a tight slap and must be thrown to china or itly wherever he wants.
Just Useless.
Is Print is becoming a blog for the unemployed  journalist. A person with minimum commonsense can research better than this.
Please print you are just survived because of Shekhar Gupta as he speaks some sense.  
How much did you pay for this Editors opinion. You should sue him for damages he caused to you.
Well Mr. Vij,
I don’t think you understand the science behind this lock down.  This virus has a gestation period of 14 days.  Until these 14 days are over, a carrier of the disease will not test positive, regardless of how many times you conduct the test.  Given the meagre testing resources that we have in India, we cannot afford to “test test test test test test …” like this Author would like us to believe.  He is just parroting what the WHO said and that is something that even some of the most prosperous countries have not been able to afford.
So when you have a lock down for 21 days, all these silent carriers would now test positive in a single test towards the end of the lock down period.  And having kept them at their homes and not allowing them to mix with people and spread the disease, you would have only this carrier and his immediate family members affected.  Now we have a controlled population who are affected and you can quarantine them and arrest further spread of the disease.
So towards the end of this 21 days, do expect to see a sudden spurt in the number of cases.  Don’t say then that the lock down did not have any effect.  Remember that these will be those silent carriers and their immediate family members who will be coming out.  Thereafter, you should see the graph plateauing out.  And hopefully the Indian summer would do the rest of the job.
Now imagine we did not have this lock down.  These silent carriers would be roaming freely and infecting people, who in turn would be infecting others.  And that population would be exponentially larger than the population of the silent carriers and their immediate families.  Hope you now understand the science and statistics behind this move.
Also, imagine what would happen if this infection were to reach the hinterland where you have almost negligible medical facilities.  You would have deaths in tens of thousands, or in lakhs.  Locking down hot zones may have helped in countries that have less population density but not in a country like India of such size and such dense population.
BTW, the two other biggest viruses that India fought and vanquished, viz., small pox and polio  were fought on similar lines.  Just that the extreme of a lock down was not necessary as the spread was not as fast as this one.
On another note, the idea is not to buy time for getting additional testing kits and ventilators.  Even if we had those in plentiful, for a country of the size and population density as India any amount of testing resources and ventilators would have proved inadequate if we reached the stage – 3 of the infection.  So that point is moot!
Coming to your other point of how the poor people would manage this lock down.  Do you think they can manage an epidemic better than starvation?  I say that can manage the latter better, for they do not have any knowledge of the former in order to tackle it.  At least they know the latter far far better as they are used to partial bouts of it every now and then.  But the former is totally out of their control.  If they land in an epidemic, can you imagine what a chaos that will create?  Since times immemorial, man has controlled hunger but has failed to control disease.  So the first target is the disease and then the hunger.  BTW, the Government has announced about 1.7 Lakh Crore of economic aid for the poorest of the poor who are affected by this lock down.  Agreed that more may have to be done, but that I think will be done as the situation unfolds.  If the Indian summer takes care of the virus, then we may not need any more financial stimulus, but if not, then we may need more such doses.  But then let’s first wait for the situation to unfold.
Now hope you would support this national move with full gusto and not remain a citizen suspicious of the Government’s every move.
Awesome reply
Very well written!
Its sometimes a shame, that the replies aren’t to the point and are mostly curse words.
The article only gets more validation in that case. But a fitting logical reply with explanations is the best way to approach this!
Well if Mr Vij has little knowledge of incubation period you have incomplete knowledge. What you are talking about only applies to a point source epidemic where there is a single exposure and we get all cases within a single incubation period. However this is not a single point source epidemic but a propagated one. Here there is continuous transmission in which there is little correlation with the incubation period because each patient’s incubation periods would overlap. 
If a person were to meet all his contacts on one and the same day ,all their incubation periods would start on that day and they all would get infected(assuming they had pretty long and close contact required for infection) within a single incubation period. However a person before showing his own symptoms may meet many different people on different days and hence their incubation periods start at different times and hence their periods may not coincide but they have varying degrees of overlap. This leads to a continuous stream of cases all occuring at different times. The sole purpose of the lockdown is to isolate the sick and trace all their contacts,thus stop the chain of transmission,then anticipate cases from only this vast contact list we have and look out for anyone outside the list(community transmission),and to prepare for the influx of cases from this contact list by expanding your hospitals. This is presuming you have no community transmission. If there is anticipation of community transmission ,the period of lockdown depends on the amount of time required to sufficiently decrease transmission rates in order to buy time for building capacity to manage the surge in cases. So lockdown period is only very crudely linked to incubation period in a propagated epidemic like we have here.
Very well said with excellent details. But this moron won’t listen as he is paid by anti-nationals.
Writer is an Idiot and might be mentally ill his views is showing he has no idea about the virus and also he is not aware about the guidelines issued by home ministry and state govt regarding farmers and their crops and essential goods supply, now our Govt. handle it very strongly. This is not right time to talking about economy.We need to follow below mentioned tag line.
Jaan hai to Jahan hai ….
Finally, There will be More Death because of Starvation, than Corona. Well Explained Article. What happens If there is Corona Epidemic, even after Curfew. Will Modi Extend Curfew for more days. With only a fact that, Crowding Grows Corona,  the Curfew NOT going to Stop Corona, But develops People’s anger mentality over the Government.
What A foolish writer…..it’s not jus Indian economy …. it’s the world economy ….. why r we even thinking of economy at this time …. it’s all about our lives …. salute to Modi for keeping our lives before money ….it’s jus a pause button to the economy …. imagine of all d resources not being wasted and used … once d lockdown is over we might have more than resources to consume which means boom in the economy …. I salute PM MODI for dis amazing decision and putting lives before anything in dis world
Reading the vitriol being poured on Shivam, it’s clear that not just Modi is India’s problem. It’s the ‘educated’ The future of India is indeed bleak.
A blatantly negative article. Never knew journalists and analysts of Luyten’s Media could be so shameless.  I guess money speaks — these idiots are not genuine journalists. They are mercenaries who work for money.
This bloody Idiot must be sent to China for treatment. Very poorly researched articulation. How come the editors of The Print allow such a poorly articulated subject to be published?
Look at anand vihar delhi,
These are Indians the real Indias.
60% dig the well daily,
The fetch a pale of water.
the print should seriously look at the quality of the articles that are published if it wants to maintain its credibilty
Exactly.
this article is an insult to journalism
Another modi hater,
Shivam is not only Modi hater but India hater, humanity hater and This The Print is only Rahul supporter who runs to Bankok for reasons known to him.  Stupid Shivam if some brain left in your this dull head, you would not have put exonomy before people’s lives. Shame on you. You don’t deserve my spit.
True that. i aint a modi fan. but i can tell you ,in the poorly structure country like india,its the only way to reduce the transmission.and preliminary goal now is to stop viral load n spread in community to contain them in a proper way.these media people creating all bullshit things to question. please go outside and talk media. devolped countries are struggling to contain corona. dont be a stupid to scold our nation.
You put it rightlyy👍👍
What are evidences Dr Akshay .National lockdown for 21 days will eliminate Corona!
This scrap guy is dreaming of something more than Italy or China. But the country is going in the right direction. India will not fall into your evils trap.
Government has announced 1.75000crore with direct account transfer to the needy. But if other than this govt, any Tom Dick Harry govt was in power, they would have looted this money and shared among themselves. India thanks God for keeping modi at these difficult times.
Modi tum aage bado, him tumhare saath Hain.
Just rubbish shameful selfish approach, the editor showing. I think he must be declared illiterate if he can’t suggest a best alternate for this lock down. If his approach is for India’s wellness then suggest what to do. Not just criticize. If Indian PM has not done this lock down then he must have written that Indian PM Modi has left people to die and caring just for economy.  These people make us feel why we shouldn’t have any ‘specific political party’, any ‘specific media journalism’, any specific ‘writer, editor or reporter’.
Totally agree with your point of view. The reporter seems to be a lover of the opposition party. Nonetheless, if he had the courage to give a recommendation then it would have been a good conclusion.
True.
Will someone give a hard slap to this author? Who is worried about economy now? People has to survive first, economy comes later.
The author has a comprehension deficit. He cannot understand and appreciate the differences between lives and livelihood. On the longer run, death of a family member would invite more wrath from the public than the lost livelihood in the shortrun.
Bro,
Last thing we need in this boring lock down when there’s nothing to work is a demotivating piece you call article.
This not so populated, easy to govern country is not for great people like you. Please go to Singapore or whatever highly sophisticated place you want to go ASAP.
Last but not the least, “don’t come back !!”
Like “EVER !!!”
So pathetic approach in understanding the subject topic.
Clearly its sadist mindset while penning down the article. Sitting in office and writing such article is always easier.
Article doesn’t deserve any further comments
Are you speaking sense? Such a rubbish writing! You better get out of India and go to Italy or Wuhan.  What else do you want a PM to act timely?  Prime Minister is supposed to delegate power and authority to state government….! The countries you have mentioned… Do you think they have tackled this issue very wisely and effectively? Aren’t you seeing the data that is being updated then and there? Demotivator !
Indians don’t even know how the economy works and don’t have any clue why they should be worried. Let them learn a hard lesson.  Their fool’s paradise would help them
The author Shivam Vij needs to get his head examined…it is so easy to blabber like verbal diarrhoea…but the fact remains that what the Modi government has done is what was essential to contain and stem the spread of the virus… economy can be rebuilt if we survive…we can have policies for development even if we go back 20 years due to the lockdown…but Modi government has no choice…development versus survival? What will you choose Shivam Vij? What will you choose Anonymous? Rising stock markets? Or your breathing if you survive the disease? Think before you blabber such nonsense. Put yourself in the situation of the government and ask what would you have done if there are cases in every state in india? Lockdown a few and not entire India? Because you think economy is more important than survival? You are a cynic and a madman. Learn to appreciate what Modi government is doing.. and think that perhaps that man in the top job perhaps is losing sleep on how to manage a disaster of such epic proportions the world has never seen. So shut the fuck up and ret
What is there to appreciate
My dear
Google CEO- Indian
Microsoft CEO – Indian
Adobe CEO – Indian
Nokia CEO – Indian
GoDaddy CEO – INDIAN
AND many more CEOs making India proud working overseas.
Indians are not fool and India will definitely come out from this crisis in 2 months.
BOOKMARK MY comment!
Shivam, don’t you think you are a super idiot? How can there be area specific lockdown, when Covid-19 positive cases are being detected in almost all states in India. In that case a national lockdown is the only answer. The problem with guys like you are, having developed a pathological hatred for Modi, anything and everything done by the Govt is bad. But thankfully, idiots like you are in miniscule numbers. If we are to find faults in the steps taken by the Govt, yes there will be many. In a country of 1.3 billion people its bound to happen. But stop doing dirty politics over it. If we are now to say that Kerala and Maharashtra , both non-BJP Govt, has the highest cases and is showing no signs of residing, would that be fair? Shall we then show them in bad light and castigate them and label them as incompetent? No, I dont think so. The people of India are much more sensible and rational than you are. I am happy that people like you (and Shekar Gupta) do not get space in mainstream media and have to be contended with some 3rd rate online news portal like The Print.
No other country has done a complete lock down. You should only lock down the hot spot areas. Wake up. This lock down will kill the economy that was already dying!
And those countries are facing the consequences.. Please get your facts right
Will you please tell us where is the HOT SPOT in India.
Absolutely this lockdown is like giving the patient an antidote medicine for snakebite when he is bitten by a bee. Hope the extra medication that modiji has served to annihilate the virus doesn’t suffocate the economy and employment to a sudden death.
There are a few idiots who didn’t understand the words quarantine and self isolation and there are another few idiots who didn’t understand social distancing so in order that these two sets of idiots meet them definitely it will be a mass massacre. so it’s better decision from Modi to keep sensible people safe from these two sets of idiots.
So what is the solution you are proposing ? Criticizing is easy but what is required to give constructive suggestions ? In this long article not one single useful suggestion in terms of an alternative solution has been offered by the author.  This an unprecedented situation and there are no easy solutions  ,  If you can offer any help at-least don’t create negativity by just criticizing mindlessly. This is not the time to grind your political axe.
The author of the article is 100% mental disorder patient & he should be kept isolated island for at least 9 months at this situation  with Apple mobile without SIM, During the isolation period he can be  communicated other than human being. And he wants to be more smarter than our belove Prime Minister NARENDRA MODI & our prime will provide him Finance Minister portfolio  for next term after Nirmala Sitaraman.
Feel you were in some sort of isolation so far.  Nobody requires millions of examples to show the govt.’s incompetency. Just one – when more nations started picking up infections in the first week of March (Italy, Spain, Singapore etc.) and when few nations started sourcing testing kits (South Korea, Japan etc.) to test their citizens, we stood “under-prepared”, selling social media accounts on Women’s Day. Good day to you, sir. 
Thank you for not thinking much.
He may be given company of Sitharaman on the island
If such only authers r left in India for writing then d day is not far ahead when only monkeys will run d media n only donkeys will have d fun to pass d time..hope google too not like to provide platform for such psychos
Well an economy package and Rbi package has been announced..you should have waited ..looking stupid aren’t you?
If we manage to get out of the mess before the US and other large countries you will look like a bigger idiot.
Don’t like modi but criticism just for the sake of it is stupid.
Do you understand economy or what you call a fiscal package?
Great article, all the detailed specified are very much realistic.  I hope the govt take more actions towards COVID Testing, Medical Equipment Distribution, rapid santory efforst to control the virus from spreading. Disinfection spraying should be an immediate priority, we should get more volunteers to help clean up the communities rather than shutting down the garbage pickup.. etc.  Food supply chain should not be shut down by any means.
The central government announced a package of 1 lakh 70 thousand crores
You can start selling pakodas on the road. Would suit you better than  writing articles. But I doubt you would succeed in that too. Every job requires a little bit of common Sense. Does that mean that I’m calling you a moron.. yesssss.
Go get a life in Italy, china or Iran. India is not a place for morons like you who feed on biscuits.
Another Modi Bakht that cannot take the truth!
The truth? And where can it be found, my dear Sir? In this arse-wipe of an article? The author clearly neither has an idea of the severity of a pandemic of this scale, nor does he understand how it spreads. He sits sipping espresso, fiddling with his blingy doodads in his I<3NY tee and writes with cheese-fed languid dismissal about how to contain a pandemic in a densely populated nation  of 1.3-billion people: people who can't even grasp the simple idea of social isolation, or fathom why it is needed. What does he prescribe for them? Nationwide testing and immediate quarantine. 1.3 billion people being tested and quarantined, even those with no symptoms. How exactly will this massive infrastructure erect itself? How are we to ascertain that the testing centres themselves, where people will obviously huddle together, won't be massive incubators of this disease? Does he have the simplest idea about the science of a pandemic, let alone that of the virus? He is an ignorant, myopic, rigid, mean and fatuous showoff who has chosen a very wrong moment to blather on this matter.
#OMKV
I agree, may be they seek popularity by writing so much of toxic content About a person who didn’t look at billionaire business lobby before making such decision.
   Planes are to rescue people who left India for better opportunities for themselves.
   Modi ji is empathetic unlike leaders of developed nations.
he is just saying that testing shud be done ppl shud be forced to wear masks and other things like public sanitisation by spraying the necessary sprays in society proper supply of foodstuffs shud have been done ; but that was not done but people are ‘ just made to sit at home and dont go out on roads else we will shoot u etc’ and just like demonetisation today we are sitting at home with no food in the house  because pm assured there will be no stoppage but when we go to kirana shop there is nothing … cops stopping us and there are videos of lathis charge and coos punishing ppl for simple grocery and vegetable accessus… no petrol no access to bank or atm … if we go out then there is danger of police thrashing …what is this … is this a joke… im more scared of humans than the virus now… this was not expected in such sensitive times actually i had much respect for the pm but now im just worried
I dont think weiter was trying to boost economy he is just saying that testing shud be done ppl shud be forced to wear masks and other things like public sanitisation by spraying the necessary sprays in society proper supply of foodstuffs shud have been done ; but that was not done but people are ‘ just made to sit at home and dont go out on roads else we will shoot u etc’ and just like demonetisation today we are sitting at home with no food in the house  because pm assured there will be no stoppage but when we go to kirana shop there is nothing … cops stopping us and there are videos of lathis charge and coos punishing ppl for simple grocery and vegetable accessus… no petrol no access to bank or atm … if we go out then there is danger of police thrashing …what is this … is this a joke… im more scared of humans than the virus now… this was not expected in such sensitive times actually i had much respect for the pm but now im just worried
I am 110% sure that if Modi had not declared a lock down the same author would have written a equally long article on how not imposing a lockdown is going to devastate our Healthcare system which is ill prepared for such contingencies, how we are having so few equipment and how that great idiot Modi, has not learnt from experience of Italy, Spain and USA blah blah. 
It is the tragedy of our nation that we have a media who will tailor their response to every issue to suit their political inclinations rather than facts or analysis.
Right sir exactly right
I feel everyone is entitled to have their opinion. There is nothing wrong if someone is expressing their view. My point is an average educated Indian has to make their own judgement . In addition, he doesn’t have any statistical data to back it up. Vaccine is almost one year away .Using words like few months away shows he is not a good researcher .  He doesn’t critical reason with various steps implemented by present government. Demonetization is related to economics and public healthcare is a very different aspect as it encompasses human lives.
Spot on maam
You are Sick !!
Please Quarantine yourself and stop writing.
I feel sad for the print because comparing india with countries like singapore is so illogical. They fail to understand people can easily see through their intentions. I am not a modi supporter but atleast you should appreciate a step which really makes good sense.
Mr Gaurav Pant: Why don’t you put yourself in the shoes of migrant labourers who have lost their jobs,have no income and walking back to their villages on foot hundereds of miles away with their small children because there is no transport to take them back to their homes.If you had any compassion for the millions of poor labourers and workers who were working in big cities far away from their villages and suddenly find their lives uprooted without work,jobs and income because of reckless decision to enforce nationwide lockdown to fight coronavirus,how is it a sensible decision ?Is it not a cure which is worse than the disease?
Don’t even think that these idiots have any soul and compassion for the poor.
First of all RIP to the thought process of the author for making such UN(AUTHOR)IZED statements.
Mr. Yogeshwar Davar: Undoubtedly economy will be effected. people are facing some problems. labourers might have lost the jobs. But why you people cant think the other way round. What if those labourers go to their jobs to earn daily wage and get contaminated by the virus. thereafter the said virus is transmitted in their families including old parents and kids. What if those labourers are travelling by train/bus and get infected by any co-passenger and transmits the virus to their home. This way whole family will be in the hospital, will not be able to care for each other or even see each other. and God forbid, if anyone of them could not survive, who will be responsible? Will balanced economy feed his family for life?
Moreover if you are too worried for the poor labourers, check out the financial aid provided by the Government. I know it wont be much but still will be a help to them. Further it would be great if the critics like you help those poor labourers survive during this tough time by donating food and essential stuff and try to stay at home for the safety of your family.
Any course for journalism ? or anybody can write?
Baseless, Shameless.
Hatered .
Nonsense Article.
Will not read  your print again.
I think Modi ji haunting you.
The countries like Taiwan, Singapore,Germany which writer mentioned have hardly any indication of Corona virus infection but in India it is being found almost in every state even in remote areas where we could not dream of this
So only solution left is Social Distancing and that is only possible by completely lockdown by force as most of us lack discipline
Modi told Jaan He To Jahaan He
Let us support this decision of Govt
Are you seriously writing this article? I mean how do you guys think about things?  And stop fucking comparing things and mentality with other countries. Because things are Totally different.
Simone can adopt technologies but you can’t adopt  how they think !
Government do what is best for their people.
And they have announced budget for poors and who are suffering.  So stop  fucking with things.
Please BOYCOTT this
And please delete this
Rona dhone ke ilawa solution bhi nikalo karo chz ka
Itne bdi problem. You are still writing this kind of article. Dude get some work!
I’m going to sue you for trying to creat panic among the Indians. Be very careful what you wish for. I won’t call you any idiot or something. You very well know what you’re doing and I feel you are a danger to the integrity of my country. I’m saving this article so that I can sue you post lockdown. Loser!
As a citizen of this country you are entitled to have your opinion, however, it would be wise to use it for a positive, hopeful impact in strange times like these.
Yes, several questions/ issues you’ve brought up in your article have no answers and are unresolved but when there are no better alternatives you can suggest, it would be best to keep your views as unbiased as possible.
While your article addresses some key concerns, the tone and the bias against a particular individual ( in this case our Prime Minister) is so evident, that it nullifies facts worthy of attention.
Indian citizens morale is what will help us through a crisis of this sort, and you’re not helping with that in any way!
For the sake of writing articles don’t write. If you have any other suggestions for the benifit to our citizens please do that. In this emergency time all should work together to help each other instead criticising. God bless everyone .
Totally agreed! The obnoxious guy is comparing India to other countries but little did he keep in mind the huge population of India! Moreover considering the ignorant mindset of Indians, whether be educated or uneducated, lockdown is the only way out to limit the outbreak.
Shivam Vij has neither knowledge about the way Virus spreads nor about the economy. He has only negative thoughts in his mind. He is just spitting the venom in public.
Without lock down, only having crore of testing kits, what is the use? Italy and US have enough testing kit. Have they stopped the spreading of virus?
Shivam kind of journalists are presstitutes. Only to get some TRP, they write such mindless articles.
Shame on you Shivam…shame……
I don’t know how people are behaving with their half knowledge. Khud ko to kuch karna nahi and jo kare uspe comments karo. You shout be ashemhed of this. Save nation , save economy.
The report is very misleading. I am not a Modi bhakt but definitely support the lockdown. The reason being we as a country are not capable to treat millions if they are infected. The best case scenario is prevention measure. This lockdown will save lives , there’s no doubt at all about that. The examples of other countries show a death toll so much higher than ours. Testing testing testing is not the answer when there’s NO CURE.
Also on another note this article should be reported for spreading fake news and unnecessary panic amongst public. The print media will now be held responsible too.
PS I work for the print media so I know what I am talking about before you start raising fingers. Stay safe stay inside. For everyone’s sake.
The report is fully base less.  Anti patriotic. Every life of Indian is valuable. The author might not have known it is a pendamic and social isolation is the best medicine. The luck down to be extended for another 7 days to defeat the corona. The journalist might be anti modi.
The virus will not be defeated by a lock down it will only be slowed. South Korea has done the best without a lock down. They used a phone app and when someone tested positive they were required to stay at home and all people that came in contact with them were also required. Lock downs will not solve the problem but may give time to get more testing and safety equipment to hospitals. Hot zones are the only areas that should be shut down. This will completely kill the Indian economy!
Although you have penned down large article but absolutely failed to recognise. This time is to appreciate the collective approach of the Govt. Of India and Honorable Pime Minister, Shri Narendra Ji. Bleek sense of urgency in your line of understanding is inevitable. This is a giant step again those who believe peace can be disturbed with biological threats. It is our time to co-operate in strengthening our lovely nation.  Everyone should start contributing to PM relief fund without a second thought. Our Government needs our support, and only one honest effort will bring unexpected change.
Whole world is passing through a rare situation, – whole mankind is in extreme tension with the outbreak of covid -19. It is high time that we take all preventive & corrective measures to combat the virus & whole heartedly support every positive step of our governments in this regard . We pray that scientists discover medicines for the pandemic at the earliest to save the humanity.
The writer is too nasty. It is more surprising how such writings are being appeared in the media !
So much of misunderstanding from this piece. I mean yeah, the author uses rather strong language criticizing the PM but I agree to his point that this whole lockdown will be futile if tests are not done. Otherwise, it will explode again once lockdown is over.
I support the decision of lockdown because we people lack discipline and general awareness at such times (social distancing? What? Quarantine. Run!). But also, without tests, we will turn into a covid blackhole.
What you think that what our Pm Modi Ji did is not correct and what you are saying is correct then ofcourse you code have been PM right?
But thank God that educated illiterate like you are not our PM.
This type of disappointments comments will zeopardize the hopes of country people. Modi is taking right steps at right time.  Now it is the need of the hour that everybody should strictly follow whatever steps the government is taking. We (each and every individual) should have confident that within this 21 days, we should control–rather prevent, the disease by limiting ourselves to ‘self curfew’ and stay in home.
Not to politicize the grave situation.
Talking about which Economy that is already gone down before the entry of corona virus.
Very sad
You don’t know what is happening in UK now.
My cousin has not come out of the house since 1 months.
Also if someone talks with other on road while on grocery shop or Gas station in Germany he is fined with 25k euros = 20 lakh rupees. If Modi does similar things here the people like will start barking .
My Dear  ,Modi has guts to take all these decisions. Had it been some other regime, just imagine how many more days would they have taken to take the decision of lockdown.
Economy comes after the life.
I think writer has got congress party ticket..  kuch bhi likha hai.. kaunsa mal fookte ho bhai ??
The author doesn’t seem to be sane person. Don’t waste time in reading such useless articles.
So you have made a long description to find out where our Pm missed to serve our country so be the one to correct it .. lead a country is not as easy as filling your columns. If you really care then be a advisor not a commentator..
  Reporter without a mind .. literate but fool
..shame on you
Yesss.. You are right… Everything PM does they oppose him any way… But will Not suggest how Indians should support Govt. stand… After all this National emergency..
Yes sir u said is 1000% correct istead of only criticising he should have come with some positive thinking than only pointing out mistakes but as fas situation of our huge population country our beloved PM has taken maximum efforts to save citizens of our country
Totally agreed! The obnoxious guy is comparing India to other countries but little did he keep in mind the huge population of India! Moreover considering the ignorant mindset of Indians, whether be educated or uneducated, lockdown is the only way out to limit the outbreak.
Very right sir…the print always go against our prime minister…they are sold…they are paid for that..
Very right sir…the print always go against our prime minister…they are sold…they are paid for that..
70% dig well daily to fetch a pale of water.
Doing things without planning or without proper way is much more worse dangerous than the intended.
Bhai there is no point in giving our views to this scumbags who even can’t address its own prime minister as PM and just write Modi in big bold.
In these hard times one should be spreading hopes and positivity people are finding out the errors.
The author should have quarantined his views within himself for ever instead of spreading the venom against our beloved PM Modiji in public by publishing such callous news. Shame on the author and the publisher.
Can you provide some better plan than to lockdown. Do you want to make condition like Italy. Fools like u made that happen in Italy.  You have right to express your opinion but give valid facts before making foolish comments.
The author should have quarantined his views within himself for ever instead of spreading the venom against our beloved PM Modiji in public by publishing such callous news. Shame on the author and the publisher.
I request you to say sorry and delete this article immediately. Congis ney funding kia kya aise likney keliye? Kithney dhiya? Sorry to say this. Very bad.
The best answer to such articles and media house is BOYCOTT. They like attention that is why they always sensationalize any news, there news are always in opposite direction. These people don’t care about emotions, conditions, prevailing scenarios and most importantly they have no relation with the truth.
Kindly boycott these money-minded, anti-national fools.
Vaise to me aisi 2 kodi ki websites pr news padhne nahi aata but vo google app me show ho gai to aagaya ye padhne ki koi pagal he jo aisa article likh rha he.
Ye article padhne k baad mera bahut man hua ki abhi comment me bahut achee se pelunga inko.
But jab me comments section me aaya to thand pad gai man ko.
Bhai logo ne bahut ache se pela he tumko.
Agreed dude.
Itta kitta zehar bhare ho bhai
The author of this article is sick and suffering from mental disorder, he is a bigger threat than corona. You people from media are like chef, who prepare these dish for us in the shape of an artical, news or an analysis. It’s a diet for our brain. But you are serving poison in its purest form. The thought process of the writer of this article is extremely toxic. He needs an immediate shift to an asylum or Chinese detention center where they keep Uyghur community. I am blocking all the posts from your end. I also request all readers who found it objectionable to refrain themselves from these anti humans.
Bleady idiots wil talk about economy now, what should it wil do if u die ruthlessly from that virus , don’t utter a single word about NARENDRA MODI JI sir,  experienced Modi sir and Team working out to bring solutions for the removal of this virus from our society,
It’s stupid thing to talk about other things now.
See instead of going against the obstacle, better to be far and think a way to avoid from it and prevention is better than cure Mr. Bleady hell who wrote a text on Modi. 
Just go ahead and think of avoiding it and if possible present, support government by giving ideas to avoid the deadly virus which had been spreading so fast and killing everyone. 
Mind ur thoughts before giving it to media.
It seemed this article was written by some foreign media house so if anything goes sideways in future Indian government should be held responsible.
Maybe The Print is getting fund from outside. This is MY PERSONAL VIEWS.
The Author of this article should be sent to china or italy as they are a national treasure.
We can afford to lose one or two of such national treasures bye bye and hopefully d..!
What an idiot of a reporter. Even developed countries don’t have testing n treatment facilities. See the state of USA Italy Spain France. These countries have a small percentage of population compared to us. Prevention is better than cure. Who and on what grounds this person has become a reporter GOD knows. We should reading poor grade “The Print”! Shame on the reporter, an utter useless Indian at the most.
Dear writer, Warm Greetings !!!
With due regard to your views in this article, personally i feel that it lacks broader vision. I am not very expert on the subject. However seeing & hearing the news about present situation in many affected countries, and my intuition says that whatever Modi Ji has done, he has done it as a prudent PM. Now it’s moral responsibility of each one of us to obey and support the decision of our Govt. in this testing time and remain in the remembrance of the “Ultimate Creator” of this Universe. Acceptance, Surrender and foremost Love for all creatures, can help us win this fight against deadliest coronavirus. Since last 11 years I have been doing Heart-based Meditation of Heartfulness which has increased my inner strength and feeling of presence of the Divinity in everyone and everywhere. I will suggest that each one of us should try to do Meditation for about 15 minutes atleast with prayerful and firm suggestion that entire humanity has become free from coronavirus and may that what is best for all, happen.
If you have had the responsibility of saving life of 1.3 billion people compared to economy ….I can see what you would choose it’s best you are just a writer and not a leader….Hope from next time the company as well the writer would think what is right and wrong before publishing such unethical artical
I wonder why all of the comments go against the article. Everyone has their own free will.
If Freedom of speech is targetted against a good step then it must also be replied i the same language……..
and
by the way dear sir if the writer has the authority of Freedom of Speech then why not us. 
Any takes Mr. Leo !!
Wow.. you guys need to screen the writers you allow to occupy your web space.. while it’s clear our man went to grammar school.. he completely missed the school of rationality vs opinion… Sadly the imph has neither.. on second thoughts lets start a donation campaign so the government can buy more kits that our country can’t afford . What say mr scribe/ imbecile/ idiot!
I think you are supporter of left parties who don’t know how to act in difficult situations.  First when you have life then only we can think of economy.  Fools will only  think about economy at this juncture.  Even the Congress president also supported government and given few valuable suggestions.  Though the Congress don’t have much knowledge and they always think there political interests still supported the government.  Being a educated and having knowledge about the present situation how this reporter wrote this column.  If they want  news come to streets and write what happening.  If you are so wise give good suggestion s.  Merely making comments on central government will not become you great.
Pagla hai ye
This entire bull dung for a website is anti nationalist and should be banned in such a way that it cannot come back up ever again. Aren’t you guys ashamed of brazenly writing baseless bull dung against the hon. PM? Regardless of whether he is wrong or not, you out of all cliche commoners are not allowed to talk about a statesman. I hope your page goes to hell, along with it’s creators and perpetrators of such anti Modi hatred.  If the lockdown didn’t occur, then the virus will be at your doorstep within the blink of an eye. I hope your half baked brain gets a good beating by Modi’s success!
Shame on you Shivam Vij and keep your expert advice with you. Bloody idiot.
Stupid person. Shameless
Ye pakka Rahul Gandhi ka bhai hoga.
The PRINT
Take off this article with immediate effect, this is irresponsible media. In the times of crisis we expect better from a media house like yourself, not this kind of bull shit.
Mein itna neeche scroll kiya just to write that author is stupid
What a shame……….. At a time of national emergency and crisis, people like you are spreading hate, unrest and intensifying stress and anxiety in country….. Keep your hatred to yourself, and please be  of any help to ur country.
Rather than blaming….. If you have Guts and courage, be a responsible citizen and  spread some positivity ! Though difficult for u, atleast
U must try
This is called impact, a deep impact like situation, that means you need to believe one way and act accordingly, because of  time constraint. Some jerks can’t believe, they have restrictions on thought process.
Journalism biased.  Sure we want to know our nation, it’s leaders and the people are always right! Specially when we have divinity in so many shapes, colors, sizes, forms…
But the fact remains we have blundered like our Big Brother Trump and the likes of who worship him!
Few more days and we will be in the top countries of the world like America who is currently a topper in the category of the highest infection cases in the world!
Any bets on where India will stand thanks to the timely inactions of our great leaders 👀
Agent of enemy country.
Author should be sent to treat and help C virus patients
Then please go out and save the economy. You are our last hope.
Print has a terrific recruitment team. They search for the most illiterate people. It requires efforts, time, energy and non-functioning brain. Keep it up ThePrint!
This is the most stupid and idiotic article. In the time of crisis, when other countries have reported to around 50-60k cases and 3-5k deaths, India have contained the situation due to social distancing and lockdown. The govt is trying a lot to provide people with essentials and save them from dying a painful death due to infection. And all this stupid pothole outlet is doing is spreading its anti-govt agenda and trying to cause panic. You morons have nothin better to do anytime. Atleast try to support nation in a time of crisis like this.
Yeh article likhane wala gadha kon hai…
What a stupid article. Run this country for one day and you will get to know. Look at the situation in Germany and US without the lockdown.
Do anyone really anyone can write the bullshit and get paid by THE PRINT or will you always be Anti – Modi. I am not the fan of the government either but I am not blindfolded by the situation today. And yes, PLEASE STOP REPRESENTING AS IF ALL INDIAN SHARE THE SAME SHITTY THOUGHTS AS YOURS. Have you even looked outside your window before lockdown??
We have a huge population even in curfew the situation of SBJI-MANDI is difficult to control. Have you seen News after the 1 day lockdown, people literally were in streets celebrating with DHOLS. Has your BOSS read what wrote, if yes then you guys have done well to buy yourself some haters. Media houses like you are the reason citizens are mentally effected. I request THE PRINT to remove this article as this is hurting sentiments of the people in this crisis when there are many things to be taken care of.
If you question government people start saying it’s anti Modi or anti national.
Give a thought how can be anti Modi . It’s government of India and not Modi government.
Any journalist and BJP were asking that time government any question but no one called either journalist or BJP anti national.
In this article the government should find out they missed and work on that .
But to keep any one asking question term them anti Modi or anti national.
It’s ridiculous.
The problem with the article is that it is factually incorrect. The author holds up Germany and Turkey as models of great response to the Covid-19 pandemic. Germany had 45,000 cases and 270 deaths a few hours ago, and Turkey had 2,433 cases and 59 deaths yesterday. Turkey saw a sudden spike of over 500 cases in the past one day. It is too early to applaud any country at this time. With 1.7 lakh crores in direct aid to low income citizens , heavily subsidized rice and wheat, insurance coverage for health care professionals, and many other steps the government is doing its best. the government has said that daily wage earners and people in lower income groups are not going to go without food.  Direct cash transfer is being made to their bank accounts. In a country with such a massive population and very high population density, this virus can cause a major calamity.  The lockdown allows some degree of social distancing.  People now have to respond to the government’s call by social distancing and taking all precautions. No amount of money is going to be enough if people behave irresponsibly. The US, with all its economic might, is becoming the epicentre of this crisis. It is one thing to offer constructive suggestions, but assuming that Modi and everyone in the government is a callous idiot just shows the arrogance of this author. It is shameful that The Print publishes such trash.
Immature and illicit representation of journalism. Please such authors or editors should be banned for 21 days.  Print is spreading irresponsible information. They showcasing advice of such fools. Hopeless. They should be hold accountable.
Shame on you guys. Who even runs or funds  such stupid, baseless, fact twisting articles based websites?
What a waste of words, effort and time? Author probably got PhD from Paki Madarasa
How deeply I wish that you could understand the significance of this 21 day lockdown. Maybe for people like you economy has suddenly become a matter of importance but for many life is precious and more important and our PM is one of them. You call the lockdown a curfew which is an another foolish thing. You probably have never wittnessed or read about what a curfew really is.
Considering the very headline of your article it was clear enough that you have no respect for a person holding as high an authority as a prime minister and you maintained no decency in mentioning his name while you addressed people nationwide. At this very crucial point, it is sad to see people like you who are just trying to worsen the situation rather than encouraging people. Ofcourse, you have the right to speak whatever you feel like but pointing out the bad in everything is not a very wise thing. Moreover when you write something like this you have a responsibility. This was the worst way of defaming the current government. Not supporting the government even at this crucial point speaks a lot about how much you are against it. LIFE ABOVE ALL IS MOST PRECIOUS. ECONOMY, MONEY AND WHATEVER YOU CAN THINK OF IS ALL SECONDARY WHEN IT COMES TO LIFE.
Guys just stop replying. The Print and the poor Author just achieved what they want to be. They got lots of impression, comments and shares. Whater you hate or love Modi your every reaction will give you business. In a crowd when everyone support a single thaught and suddenly you behave like that child who want to grab attention will act against the mass. The same phychology will apply here. The more negative comments the more business and money they will get. There is nothing related to nationalism or anti-national. I wander what happen to these guys, when this goverment will not be in power. Because only hate sales nothing else. So let’s concerntrate on this big issue and avoide these guys
He is an author full of shit in his mind n sick from both heart and mind. If he had some better idea he would have shared it through his blog….but he is talking absurd not only about economy but also about lockdown or case management…no doubt in the end what prevails in Indian population context is Darwin’s theory of survival…I hope it goes wrong as more People confines them to isolation.
To author: you are one of those gyya who doesnt like modi and who is always ready to criticise his every move.what do you think is happening here jn india??…you know delayed lockdown led italy  spain in the current terrible position.you say economy will worsen..fck that..economy can recover but ehat if human life is lost?? Ever think about that..who,china and many other countries are praising this decision..do you think they want to disrupt indian ecwonmy?? They think its wise to curfew because that way this spread will get halted or slowed and world can come up with better preparedness….also u compare india with singapore turkey malaysia, dude indian is 100 times bigger than them in popuplation wise and that is 100 times more chance of pandemic to spread…use your brain or atleast dnt think your readers doesnt have one..
What the shit is this ? does this writer wants to save the economy at the cost of our lives ?
Journalist is a monster. Crap such shit is allowed to be posted.  We are United and will follow social distance. Lucky you are not in government power guys like you can kill economy and families.  We don’t want Italy to happen here. Imagine the deaths .
Imagine if, as the Print and its 2 penny writers wish, the ‘accidental prime minister’ were in power and Covid-19 pandemic had broken out. Half the population would have died before the ‘remote controllers’ could have got time to listen to people’s out cries. Also just imagine the fate of the middle class under Dynasty Party of India.
P. S. : Mr Editor of the Print, your articles are getting stereo-typed. Please get more creative. Take a break and just chill.
After gone through few line of this article I decided this was written by …..Highly literated illiterate idiot …. All the best for your Anti BJP campaign. Idiot
A good step, no doubt, but very poorly planned execution. Who will blame Modi for imposing a lockdown, which alone can make social distancing possible, given the poor compliance mentality lack of serious awareness among us indians. Modi, as the p.m. of India has the responsibility to lead India from the front, but with a lot of proper planning. While appreciating Modi  for standing up sternly with the Lockdown,  let  all the Modi-Bhakts understand and sympathise in concrete action with the millions stranded without food and water. This is absolutely as poor an execution as demonetisation. Intelligence, wisdom and prudence is the need of the hour, found much wanting in many present-day national leaders. Jai Hind!
Please not only stop your comments but take permanent retirement from your service in the interest of the nation Please atleast barest minimum sympathy with world to resign forthwith from all your duties except eating and sleeping Illogical comments Not worth reading nor only  sham on the site but utter misleading to the public
Bhai aise blog post to hear koi likh sakta hai, ek baar us Kursi par beithne ke liye sirf thodi si mehnat bhi karke dekh. Kuch karke bhi dikhao, sirf bol mat pappu ki tarah…
The worst is that we are reading and this article of a ass licker. Shut the hell off you nonsense 😏
Please get affected by the virus and thereafter let us hear your voice Stop putting up irresponsible comments under the guise of maturity It’s better if you could please retire from doing such futile work The world will be abetter place albeit you
A totally irrelevant and biased article. At a time when the nation needs to be united it irks me to see people trying to score brownie points by saying things could have been done better not taking into consideration the size of the country, the mentality of the people or the gravity of the situation.
Irresponsible media house, should be banned permanently, shame on you.
Irresponsible media with pathetic mindset…not only India but  Whole world economy is collapsing……agr kuch accha kr nhi skte to km se km apna mu to bnd krlo…. Tum jsi media House to corona se bhi jyada dangerous hai
What’s wrong with Indian media like print is they only want to bash government which country is equipped to deal with things like this, don’t talk about China, they are very good at hiding and misinformation so back off if you cannot suggest some thing positive keep mount shut
Mr Shavam Vij, people like you will never let Indians live in peace. You are like that idiot Rahul Gandhi who can suggest no solution but keep shouting instead.
Why don’t you’ll step out and make sure money reaches the needy, instead of sitting in an AC room and penning utter rubbish?
The RSS is doing work, reaching packets of essentials to daily wage workers.
Please shut up if you cannot contribute in a positive way!
fully biased article  ,It is  very easy to crtisize others ,would be better if you suggest better solution . 
In a country like India where we have 130 crore popuation with limited testing facilities and life saving euipments .
Against your views Govt has annnounced various initatives /schemes for poors ,for which even Rahul Gandhi has first time praised the Govt.
Pl refer to condition of America ,Itley etc right now where you are advocating the non imposing of lockdowns .
Rather I prefer the banning of International flights right in Jan /Feb 20 and compulsory quarantine of 14 days of all foreingers /indians entering into India  under strict vigilance irrespective of their scannning result ,this could have resulted in  better control .
Most of the people complaining about the writer would follow Modi off a cliff just like sheep. The author is correct that a shut down will not work. It may slow down the virus but will not stop it. The only reason this shut down may do some good it to give time to produce more testing kits and safety equipment. If no one has a job after this is over then how many will die from hunger? So far in this pandemic the best country has been South Korea and they did not shut down the entire country they went after the hot zones and made those that tested positive to stay home or place them in hospitals. Sadly India does not have the kind of health care system required. This will get much worse if those with the virus are not quarantined!
If it’s your personal view, keep it with yourself, you don’t have any right of publishing it
You are a gross mistake born here,
Pray God that Corona wipe you away while it sheds on 21st day
India doesn’t need you…
relax. you sound like a psycho. please get some help.
What is wrong in the whole article??…aur tera baap ka he kya theprint…tujhe nahi pasand to maat par…anti-democrat…deshdrohi sala
Mister Reporter Do not try to insult the people of this country again…….. I am asking what you would have done if you were the government….. What would be your choice People or Economy…?????
Passing comment and filling your reporting column only by demonizing the PM and the Govt.. Will only make you irrelevant and nuisance lot…….. So look at the 98℅ of the citizens who are baring the economical and social loss for the future generations of citizens of this country………………. May your GOD save you from your thoughts………..
Who is dumb guys? Articles written should have some maturity wherein this one proves that both Print and Author are Ameture. Sickkkkkk
Well said
No doubt the author is an shameless creature. Don’t have any knowledge except anti Modi attitude.
Auther needs psychological counseling on top priority.
Why ” Print” is entertaining such writers when the world is under Covid 19 attack?
Don’t you have a seriousness of the situation?
Modis lock down is good.We Indians lack discipline of any kind.Travel around the world u will nvr have to be told wer the flight for India is departing from.It will be the only Q with 4 lines merging into one in arrow formation.while in the US we wer at a food court waiting to order , when suddenly 4 youngsters cut the Q and tried to get ahead.It was shameful behaviour and they wer put in place by the people behind the counter.
When this kind of basic discipline is lacking.The STICK is the best.I agree the powers that may b could have thot abt it better,Modi could have had a video conference with all CMs and stake holders and have daily briefings evry morning so that the people dont lose heart.it seemed like panic reaction even tho I think it is correct.Cutting of e commerce players is v v v wrong.Police mens right hand dosnt know what the left is doing.It may b teething problems.But the sooner everything is addressed including looking after the poor is done ,the better for the country.Otherwise it will b like over kill with people dying of starvation.India shld have studied the China Singapore and Korean model of handling the crisis and sooner.As the WHO stated
TESTIN TESTING TESTING AND SOCIAL DISTANCING IS THE ONLY MANTRA
I see your point author!
People like you should be thrown out from the country. Shows only your cheap & illiterate mentality along with your anti Modi mentality. Shame on you .
I agree fully with this brave author  who pointed 3 murders occurred in last seven years viz demonetisation, GST 18percent crumbled  our back and shoulders  and now this stay home  for 21.
I am in one hundred  percent  agreement  with  Bob and Jacob that lock down is useless without  aggressive testing
go to china and state your mentality . that is the right place for you
Extremely irresponsible journalism by The Print. 
Firstly, the example about Germany is absolutely misleading. The country hasn’t been locked down yet, and that shows in the numbers. As on date (27-03-2020) Germany has more than 47,000 confirmed cases (fifth in line after US, China, Italy and Spain) and 281 deaths. India, however, has 753 cases and 20 deaths. How is Germany in a better situation then? Singapore, on the other hand, has recorded more or less similar numbers to India. Above all, it isn’t fair to compare these countries with India for the primary reason that the density of population in our country is much higher than in Germany, Turkey and Singapore. Coming to your point of ‘giving people more time’. Unless the writer has been living under a rock all these days, since before the Junta Curfew itself it was known that there could be a lock down. And with ‘more time given’ the chances of the virus spreading was higher. 
While there is no denying that this will take a huge hit on the  economy, it is also well-known that the situation is equally bad world over, or even worse in some cases. The lock down will at least limit the rapid spread of the virus, thereby save god knows how many lives. As far as the worker class is concerned, I believe the government has already announced a 1.7 lakh crore relief scheme for the poor and more measures are expected to be announced. 
Stop spreading hate during this time of crisis.
thePrint should get this article removed asap..
This is truly anti national. Seems like stupid political competitors have made this..
Pathetic news at times like this.. get it off
Before posting the literature, minimum The Print media should think, if you will be not there , then what about the economic.
Request Print to block such foolish articles which can spread negativity in such challenging times…
Unwarranted to say the least…
I think that u should get mentally checked.
Bloody just don’t sit on ur sofa and writ
Print doesn’t need a government to shut it down… It’s own articles written and published is enough to being down the curtains…
I wish sanity prevails with this group of guys running print
What a stupid,nonsense article from a fool and mindless writer,,,
Very true… Itz an utter Rubbish Article with no sense prevailing whatsoever….
What a stupid,nonsense article from a fool and mindless writer,,,
Such a waste article i mean if the lockdown ws not done in the right time 1/4 th of the indian population wud have been infected n lakhs of ppl wud hv died .. pls use some brains n ethics while write such stuff .. it feels like a spineless coversation here .. idiot writter.. This article doesnt feels like a responsible journalist writeup bt an insane fool who knws nothing wt cud hv happened and blabbering around spreading useless word evn in this situation.. ethicless Journalism🙏🏻👏🏻
We should be thankful to God for having such a prime minister who is bothered about every human life in this country with out any discrimination . We have to appreciate for him and his ministries for taking such efforts specially to  support BPL  population and  extending all support  to  working community in general  by relaxing rules in banking and providing salaries to all employees. The efforts of 21 days lock down will certainly save us from that deadly virus because  we are doing hard work to come out successfully . Let us hope for the best.
Ohhh my god!!!! How venomous is The Print is….. Don’t you shame before writing this??? I can’t believe you can be this much poor……
Now understand this kind of incompetent Authors, consultant could have advised Gusisspe Cante Italian PM & Donad Trump, who in their greed for saving economy have devastated their country. Can you compare India’s Health sector matching to US, Italy or Spain. Even though their leaders have taken such huge risk. Don’t just criticize PM Modi for just sake of it without offering any concrete solution.
Bro do you have any idea about what you just wrote. Totally insane.
Well said.  The Print is a dirty outlet and Shivam Vij has written a horrible piece.  Both The Print and Vij have contracted corona virus.  Freedom of expression should have limits more so in crisis moments
Like Rajdeep Sardesai, this scribe asserts that Narendra Modi is a novice in governance and jurisprudence, and even in public health. So the PM must have called this breed of scribes before embarking on notebandi, deshbandi, or such challenges. These blokes could then do a great job of mouthing gems of wisdom handed them by bigger blokes who feed and pamper to the whims and fancies of this Desh Drohi Dal media group
Seriously what kind of stale and prejudiced article it is. Atleast save your pathetic thought process and stupid agenda until this crisis is over.
Whole country is looking forward towards Modi for bringing out of this situation, and your stupidity never gets quite.
What about countries like i mean Ideal countries like USA, Italy, Britian etc. they are not run by Modi but still succumbing and on knees. You guys focus on your agenda like this and we citizens will follow ours to oppose you and your biased generalism.
Shame…
If the views are personal . Keep them to yourself.
Why my every comment is unavailable to submit?
I think so the print don’t like truth like they post everytime.
The Print, dirty outlet and corona infected, does the same with my posts too.  Anti national The Print.  Hell with it
Irresponsible comments the idea of locdown has not taken by modi itself this is a team decision  the decision taken by team will always right unnecessary blamed and creating bad atmosphere is not good please avoid such comment and try to comment to create one India one nation one people one heart avoid hatredness think on India developments we should progress above america we wish peace harmony  we always do good to one and all
I have read many articles on google which are either against the Modi or BJP or hindutva.I have never read any article which is  protesting to triumph, Italy.
Big media like BBC etc are not disclosing data of Muslim countries like Saudi, UAE, Qatar, Oman, Turkey. People who are travelling from Saudi are infected with corona. India has many cases of covid 19 who had been travelled from Saudi and UAE.
It is set agenda against India
At the end they are funded by china so they will talk only things which are against in the favour of the nation.
This is an extremely one sided view of a pandemic which world is facing.The author needs to show balance in firstly understand the global scenario and what are the practicalities.
This is a watershed moment when our Honorable Prime Minister announced the Lockdown .
Request the Print to moderate such articles even though they are personal opinion as this is  completely negative and  tells only one side of the story 
The author fails to answer and is not an expert to give an opinion on what else could have been done.
Respect the countrymen who are adhering to the lock down and we need to be responsible while writing our opinion in this war like situation against an invisible virus
At the end they are funded by china so they will talk only things which are against in the favour of the nation!
Print,telegram you have steeped a new low…disgracefull,such an idiotic interpretation,,full of crap….who funds you people for writing such crap?
I think you are very intelligent,so I request if you can suggest any solution in which we can get rid of the virus and save the economy also.If not then please don’t post articles which are of not of any substance. Don’t compare us with China or any other country because Chinese government also does mercy killings if they cannot cure the patients,in india if a policeman hits with a stick,then also the ngo & media is after the government.Soi request you if you have a better solution then please suggest or please keep quite
Absolutely pathetic!
Wasted my time reading this shit
Grow some brains.
Stop wasting your time and ours as well.
This article looks man doesnot common sense sitting in AC cabin try to make out of this baseless article.
Dear friends don’t waste your time.
Today Modi is the best person to handle today’s densely population  country where people are think ransack by some selfish political oppostion n religious fanatics.
Who doesnot bother about their country.
FOOLISH JOURNALISM
I am blocking the print so that no future news can reach to me.
FOOLISH JOURNALISM
Senseless
Pls remove such negative article
please shut up, you idiot 🙏
Senseless
Pls remove such negative article
The print and article’s author never seen such a jackass article have some shame even us has 80000 cases what would you do of an economy on a grave yard ? Stop you shitty criticism for some time what the govt has done is the best at this time
Iss tarah k negative article iss time pr publish nahi hone chahiye… ye editor pakka anti-Modi lag ra h… iss time pr bhi politics ki padi h… abe zindagi rhe to krenge na politics.
Lagta h writer bimaar hai…Fool Bejo isse… “Get Well Soon Mamu”
This author sounds like a comedy piece. Outrageously silly and idiotic.  So biased
Once again idiot. When country is going through such a grave situation how comes such a stupid ideas to you. People like you should be kept in isolation for life period so others can live in peace.
Once again idiot. When country is going through such a grave situation how comes such a stupid ideas to you. People like you should be kept in isolation for life period so others can live in peace.
Where does and why only The Print find such stupid people to write for them?
Where does and why only The Print find such stupid people to write for them?
In these testing times what Modiji has done is best decision . Result is clear ,much less spread of corona in india . We have no alternate for Modi,s leadership. Whoever blames him for political reasons now, is stupid . The writer wil probably survive corona  only due to Modiji,s   tough decisions . It,s not joke to manage 130 cr people.
U have alternative to destroy Corona virus, lockdown nation is not only Honourable PM decision but also all higher dignitaries of nation for benefit of country as whole. This is not time to make alligation to any body else. We never expect Mahavikas Aghadi Government work in such crucial period in Maharashtra. Our CM and health Minister working round of clock. We are confident duo will be control such conditions
Now a days any Tom dick or Harry gets to write articles..
Thank you so much , modi is doing what is right to scure his citzen ,let look at it this way ,while not allow movement on one conditions
1  all the tax should at list take one passenger and before the person will enter his taxi the driver should test the person first, the same gose to auto man with one passenger also train should be two person in each seat, lastly to ensure that everyone wear mask to going any were.thank you so much.
Thank you so much , modi is doing what is right to scure his citzen ,let look at it this way ,while not allow movement on one conditions
1  all the tax should at list take one passenger and before the person will enter his taxi the driver should test the person first, the same gose to auto man with one passenger also train should be two person in each seat, lastly to ensure that everyone wear mask to going any were.thank you so much.
India, Pakistan and Bangladesh – blood brothers and so very like each other in innumerable ways – have reported miniscule numbers of virus infected and virus casualties !!
On closer look, the reason for this becomes clear enough.
The 3 countries have tested an average of only around 10 per million among the population !
Whereas those countries that have reported high number of infected and casualties have tested several hundreds and even  several thousands !
Which puts the following statement of the virology dept head of the NHS (a doctor of Indian origin)  in perspective :
“In India, you often don’t know and do not have the means or the will to know whether a man has died of pneumonia or malaria or coronavirus or  some such ailment. Disease related morbidity is extremely high”
Don’t expose your ignorance fillled Bigotry against India. Testing  blindly/wildly all over  ,that too 1.3 billion people is lunatic and stupid. It’s like finding a hair in a sanddune. India is following most scientific and rational protocol:  Testing at source of ingress( point of radial expansion), aggressive contact tracing, random testing of suspected clusters, quarantining all with travel history, tagging and reporting, prophylactic treatment of close proximates, scaling up medical infra , pooling and redistribution of available resources, roping in private and PSU corporates for aggressive manufacturing of  ventilators, conversion of existing infra as standby hospitals and  most importantly enforcing SOCIAL distancing through complete lockdown… All this to flatten the infection spread curve below the Resources line.  See the results on ground. All western Govts  and WHO have high praise for India.Dead bodies don’t lie, numbers match with infection spread rate reported in India. We have free and a highly govt hostile media to snoop around if fudging happens, or if unmapped Covid 19 death takes place anywhere. 
So keep your stupid  Western media / countries influenced mentality against India to yourself. Stop casting aspersions based on speculative idiotic theories. Your MHS fellow are like most idiotic western raised bums who have no connect with Indian reality.
Yes, India is sitting on a potential catastrophic bomb due it’s massive population. But that’s what PM Modi is seized of. He has best professionals to advice,not stupid rantsters like you.   If you are in one of EU or US, better save your own ass, stop worrying about India. We can take care ,either way.
You mean to say there are  unreported deaths ascribing the case to pneumonia? They are untreated before death? Cases are unreported assuming that those are not Covid19 ? Laughable. It is because of your last century British mindset, you believe so.
Very poor taste article
Very wrongly timed article and looks like politically motivated than being concerned about the nation. 
As rightly said by many (rather all), what will we do with an economy, when we will not live to see it. Looks like the author has done a poor research and the print wanted to publish it, with interest of attracting attention of anti government establishments. 
A good journalist always does his homework. Looks like this journalist picked up his facts from tea and beedi shop gossips. 
You may like our PM or not, that is your own view, atleast research what your are publishing to show you are a well read citizen. I would never have imagined such strong and bold measures to have been taken by any politician in opposition, had they been in power. This required courage. 
Firstly if you know this PM in personal capacity, you will never say he makes hasty decision. He is a keen listener and a voracious reader. If you ever have led teams or organisations, you will know not all decisions go right the moment you make them, there is a lot of fine tuning that goes behind it. 
On GST, people may debate, if you are well read you will know what tax regime is globally followed. If you are wise enough you would know as a finance person how many tax receipts you had to file, shipping goods across states. Yes, the rates and understanding to make it unform and smooth may take time, but it was again a bold decision and a decision the future generations will appreciate. 
Economy, the author is not observing the last 4-5 years of trend of China, which was once exemplified globally. The biggest buyer globally USA being internally focussed, most of the economies have shown a slowdown, still India was not adversely hit like many so called first world economies. 
Looks like the author is missing, CWG Scam, 2G Scam , Defence Scams, Land scams, Coal scam, agriculture scams etc., as there is nothing to talk about in Modi’s rule, so he thought since the spice was missing target Modi himself. Neither has this PM given him opportunities to speak about 26/11 or 3/93 when people could do a brazen act inside our nation and the perpetrators stayed here enjoying trials at our taxes. There is nothing to write these days, that will attract attention, so write on the PM. 
Wish the author had seen the chaos in the streets of Delhi/Mumbai when the lock down was announced, just to stock the essentials, since there were only 4 hours, it was still managable. As someone rightly said, had the announcement been done at 8AM even the Chaos could not have been manageble. Wish the author visits Italy or Spain now, to his rude shock even the essentials are missing, thanks to the PM and all local administrations, everything need to survive is available and the prices till date are same as that before lock down. 
Current situation of Covid-19, just hope the author had valued human life over economy (do not know, if he is a owner of some big conglomerate which is loosing billions during lockdown), had he been seeing successful European countries like France, UK, Italy, Spain and now US itself he would not criticize these moves. It is the same move these so called developed countries are taking post aggressive spread of the virus. Wish he had written something innovative?, that the nation could have benefitted from and he would have been amazed that PM himself would have reached out to him to understand his innovative views. Well that requires brains, to think what others (who nation may have missed). He also fails to understand it is the poors in the densely populated slums, who will live longer post the lock down when government gets ready to handle the pandemic to some extent. The vaccine that the author is talking about, he must know is not available to the most influential nations yet, so when it is available, he must thank this nation that he too will get a free vaccine like all of us, unlike in US where people are paying $4000 to just test and confirm if they have Covid 19. 
We all can just pray the sense prevails atleast amongst the educated (assuming this author is educated ) to be able to educate those that are not, in this country. We do not want a panic in nation now, we want to emerge successfully out of it and we pray  everyone in the world comes out of this crisis. It hurts to see the rest of the world struggling, imagine the same plight in our nation, what will we boost about, when so many of our brothers and sisters, would be suffering and waiting to die. Thanks to PM. Modi, thanks to efforts of our doctors (who inspite of being ill equiped are saving lives without bothering about themselves), our police who are out on the streets with no great protections (remember every policeman has a family to feed) and the able advisors of our PM that we are not seeing
painful  scenes of death similar to Europe or China, in India yet.  We as nation have always valued the human life and lives of other fellow Indians matter the most. Thanks to the government for all its efforts.
Dumb writer. I would never visit a blog on Print again, because they are not cross-checking anything before publishing.
This author is of the mindset of dividing people, specially when India needs to stand united against a common evil.
It is sad that India feeds people like this writer.
And it is exceptionally mercenary and disgustingly immoral of platform like Print to be using such articles to boost their number of clicks and comments in such a time.
Print is void of character, it is void of the fundamental spirit of media. It only wants money at the cost of spreading hatred. Print deserves shut-down, we are better off without someone poisoning the facts-seeking public’s minds with this attention-whore articles.
The author is a certified lunatic who is mentally retarded and practicing fake journalism. He needs to be sent to Spain , Italy to show the difference. Shame on these news portals to let people who spew venom to publish on their site .
Kindly do proper research before writing such nonsense.
Print and its editors are the worst idiotic journalists in India.
They are anti national, anti India, Anti Modi and are more worried about the economy when everyone’s life is at risk.
Economy can be regained with time but can Life be???
It’s the right timely decision by Modi .
These type of negative news print and it’s people spread hatred and fear , should be immediately thrashed and put behind bars.
What else you can expect from Congi stooge Mr Shekhar Gupta and his associates! Even at this time of world calamity, these buggers find convenient reason to blame Modi! you can very well imagine, how they wrote in normal times! pl read if you get time! not to get misled- but to know their intentions! If these jokers have anything left in writing! they should keep all those writing + pen and construct a “grave” and make these articles rest in peace! For those Optimists! all is not lost, we will rebound
it is feel like stray d—————–=================0,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,g barking
Thank God at the end it’s written that it’s his personal opinion. Go and get checked yourself first. You could not even think what would be the scenario if Modiji is not there. I don’t know whether you will understand from the comments what mistake you are doing or not. But God bless you with the usage of wisdom. That’s all I can say.
Vangi
Konthimbir
Dodka
Lasun
At this moment suppression and the mitigation both should be apply simaltaneously to avoid stage-3 of infection. The big challenge is the variability of the action of virus on different people depending upon their immunity system. There are many cases stayed positive even without any symptoms. Is they are will work as a carrier the answer is partially. Becuase the virus due to its big size of about 400 micron needs surface to settle it will not flow with the air and will only reach recepter when the infected person snezzes our expells body fluids. Right now there is no option to any country to stop the spread at its best by suppression. We have to flatten the curve of the rise curve of this infection. Some research papers showed effect of using antimalarial drugs along with antibiotics will help to cure but due small sample size of 25-30 patients it is hard to believe the conclusion.  Reaching the hospital for a pregnant women is not bounded because hospitals are open and talking about the daily needs there are certain restrictions given to district authorities to avoid large gathering. The decision taken by the government is reaction taken for the spread further long lasting options yet to came. Goodly the Pune based My lab got approved from CDCSO  the fast testing facility with 2.5hr. hope this will help to investigate and to treat the patients.
That is right Mr. Modi could have done this way or that, but whatever done is better, or else in future there shall not be any like this article,  as you’ll also be caculated in corona death toll.
How much did the story writer get for this trash? In dollar or in rupee? Cash or kind? In Indian account or foriegn account? In his own name or in spouse’ name? Only an extraordinarily shameless writer can make this bash-India story.  I am surprised how blind the writer is about simple arithmetic of Covid19 toll count.  I felt deeply ashamed of reading the trash.
Compared with the density of population and the nature of Covid19 being imported, while India’s  success of containing it from community spread is adorable, the story writer has discovered some foolishness. This dirty face of Indian journalism is heavily poisonous.
Even a child with a simple common sense doesn’t need to be taught how Covid19 is devastating the world and how better protected Indians are.  The writer showed two instances of Germany and China. Germany has three times more Covid19 victims and 15 times more mortality than India has. No need to compare the population density, geographic size and overall population between the two.
The writer also said China didn’t declare nationwide lockdown to contain it, while seemingly forgetting that China recorded 3500 deaths. Will Modi be allowed to remain in power by people like you, if India had such misfortune? Yes, China didn’t need a nationwide lockdown, since the disease originated and remained only in Wuhan. But it locked down the province after tolls alarmed the government.
Did the story writer mean India should have waited for the toll to reach that level for a lcokdown?
India has cases from all over the country. More than 90 percent are the cases of foreign travellers. Mind it, India is the only country in the world to evacuate its citizens from the troubled zones.
O’ My God! Such dirty minds have lost a golden opportunity after India declared strong measures to contain the epidemic.
None can rearrange your gene inside the DNA of finding fault with Modi. The DNA works for you as it helps you make dollar fortune in illicit way by being a contract writer.  While airing frustration, you make money for cooking such trashes.
But don’t foolishly believe, all readers are fools and
your fans of such shameless story writers. The world has praised India and will continue to praise to bring more pain to some frustrated minds.
Please go for a good harvest by discovering lies and make dollars. Nevertheless you will have to work harder to find fault with India and Modi.
Grow up Modi is the best for next 2 terms hes got nothing to earn for his family like u and he does not need vote bank politics. Ur nobody
Grow up Modi is the best for next 2 terms hes got nothing to earn for his family like u and he does not need vote bank politics.
At this time once again an anti Modi agenda. India compared with Singapore is so foolish and funny. And such a poor research on GDPs. Dude you will always remain an unknown consultant unresearched no sense foolish illiterate editor.
Very wrongly timed article and looks like politically motivated than being concerned about the nation. 
As rightly said by many (rather all), what will we do with an economy, when we will not live to see it. Looks like the author has done a poor research and the print wanted to publish it, with interest of attracting attention of anti government establishments. 
A good journalist always does his homework. Looks like this journalist picked up his facts from tea and beedi shop gossips. 
You may like our PM or not, that is your own view, atleast research what your are publishing to show you are a well read citizen. I would never have imagined such strong and bold measures to have been taken by any politician in opposition, had they been in power. This required courage. 
Firstly if you know this PM in personal capacity, you will never say he makes hasty decision. He is a keen listener and a voracious reader. If you ever have led teams or organisations, you will know not all decisions go right the moment you make them, there is a lot of fine tuning that goes behind it. 
On GST, people may debate, if you are well read you will know what tax regime is globally followed. If you are wise enough you would know as a finance person how many tax receipts you had to file, shipping goods across states. Yes, the rates and understanding to make it unform and smooth may take time, but it was again a bold decision and a decision the future generations will appreciate. 
Economy, the author is not observing the last 4-5 years of trend of China, which was once exemplified globally. The biggest buyer globally USA being internally focussed, most of the economies have shown a slowdown, still India was not adversely hit like many so called first world economies. 
Looks like the author is missing, CWG Scam, 2G Scam , Defence Scams, Land scams, Coal scam, agriculture scams etc., as there is nothing to talk about in Modi’s rule, so he thought since the spice was missing target Modi himself. Neither has this PM given him opportunities to speak about 26/11 or 3/93 when people could do a brazen act inside our nation and the perpetrators stayed here enjoying trials at our taxes. There is nothing to write these days, that will attract attention, so write on the PM. 
Wish the author had seen the chaos in the streets of Delhi/Mumbai when the lock down was announced, just to stock the essentials, since there were only 4 hours, it was still managable. As someone rightly said, had the announcement been done at 8AM even the Chaos could not have been manageble. Wish the author visits Italy or Spain now, to his rude shock even the essentials are missing, thanks to the PM and all local administrations, everything need to survive is available and the prices till date are same as that before lock down. 
Current situation of Covid-19, just hope the author had valued human life over economy (do not know, if he is a owner of some big conglomerate which is loosing billions during lockdown), had he been seeing successful European countries like France, UK, Italy, Spain and now US itself he would not criticize these moves. It is the same move these so called developed countries are taking post aggressive spread of the virus. Wish he had written something innovative?, that the nation could have benefitted from and he would have been amazed that PM himself would have reached out to him to understand his innovative views. Well that requires brains, to think what others (who nation may have missed). He also fails to understand it is the poors in the densely populated slums, who will live longer post the lock down when government gets ready to handle the pandemic to some extent. The vaccine that the author is talking about, he must know is not available to the most influential nations yet, so when it is available, he must thank this nation that he too will get a free vaccine like all of us, unlike in US where people are paying $4000 to just test and confirm if they have Covid 19. 
We all can just pray the sense prevails atleast amongst the educated (assuming this author is educated ) to be able to educate those that are not, in this country. We do not want a panic in nation now, we want to emerge successfully out of it and we pray  everyone in the world comes out of this crisis. It hurts to see the rest of the world struggling, imagine the same plight in our nation, what will we boost about, when so many of our brothers and sisters, would be suffering and waiting to die. Thanks to PM. Modi, thanks to efforts of our doctors (who inspite of being ill equiped are saving lives without bothering about themselves), our police who are out on the streets with no great protections (remember every policeman has a family to feed) and the able advisors of our PM that we are not seeing
painful  scenes of death similar to Europe or China, in India yet.  We as nation have always valued the human life and lives of other fellow Indians matter the most. Thanks to the government for all its efforts.
Well said
Nice  comment  arun , looks like the print will always abuse modi even if he saves the life of  the editor himself.
Are you illiterate?
This complete article is wrong.
First of all, you asked “won’t virus come back after 21 days?”. Do you have any common sense? 21 days lock down is not finalized. Number of lockdown days might increase or might not. It will be based on the stabilization of pandemic.
And you told test, test, test and then quarantine those people. Lol you might think you are acting as an anti-Modi, but let me tell you, you are an anti-Indian. By the time you test 1.3 billion people and quarantine only those people who are infected, then millions of people would be infected already.  It’s better to take precautions before it’s too late. All countries are praising for Modi decision and you are here blaming about economy. Think about lives first if you are human.
And you told Indians will die of hunger. You don’t watch news is it? Reliance fresh has promised each and every stores across India will have all the necessary items to survive. Regarding beds for patients – many hotels and resorts are giving their places for COVID patients exclusively.
I know you belong to a such gang in india where you would blame Modi about economy if Modi took decision on saving lives and you would blame Modi about lives if Modi took decision on saving economy.
You guys will never change. Illiterates who were protesting CAB also stopped due to corona and I can imagine how illiterate you are than CAB protesters.
Well said . You are a true indian
Yes I am agree with you, it’s right decision to lock down for 21days. We appreciate Modi Ji, because this decision is taken after lots of advice from experienced medical experts, it’s scientific approach.
Good one bro
Such a stupid, biased, prejudiced and misleading article total waste of readers time the authors appears to be an AC ROOM writer unaware of ground realities or just a paid article at instructions of others ;).
Abe log se jyada important hai kya economy..?? Author sathiya gya hai Pura ……… Ja tu mt maan lockdown…  Ja bahr ghum…..  Economy ko lekr akele protest kr…….
Who ever this idiot is the greatest anti national, just because he is a staunch Modi hater it doesn’t mean anything can be written and published. Citizens are very aware of these type of protagonist s. The author should be put in a bed suffering from covid.
Irresponsible Media. No need to waste reacting to this article.
man keep your ugly nose out of India …see usa what did the state lockdown do to them ….they have 23,000 patients in new york city only..we  still in gods name has patients less than 1000…. id the population survives the economy will boom once again . so  keep yourselves out of this ….
Dear Author, your mentality is very poor.
Yes bro… the author is really psycho,
first of all people are not following guidelines , which are very essential to arrest covid-19 virus spreading.
 Now making dialogues like this author did…
Tomorrow this kind of people may say Modi killed Indians…  by not taking proper measures  to stop corona.. 
What kind of idiot’s…
 are we Indians..
There is no comparison between India and Western Nations. See their population density. See the situation of US who has not gone for complete lockdown. And the perfect strategy of our Hon. PM has not led to community transmission. You do not have facts but you want to prove that you are Anti Modi that’s it.
Modi does not need your certificates. He already got a lot of praise from WHO for his strategies to combatting  Coronavirus.
Germany and Japan, restored their completely destroyed economy within few years, after world war  2.  So , economy is renewable but human life is not. Economy is for humans not humans are made for economy. So ,it is most important to save human life first. I think ,the writer is retarded by his mind.
There is no comparison between India and Western Nations. See their population density. See the situation of US who has not gone for complete lockdown. And the perfect strategy of our Hon. PM has not led to community transmission. You do not have facts but you want to prove that you are Anti Modi that’s it.
Modi does not need your certificates. He already got a lot of praise from WHO for his strategies to combatting  Coronavirus.
Jyada kya kahu
Ye lekhak jo bhi hai….. Mansik rup se bimar hai
Bhai jinda rahe to economy ko bhi sambhaal lenge….. Filhal jeevit rahne ke liye Modiji ne jo kadam uthaya hai ….. Mai uska samarthan karta hu.
Now since you have written this article, it’s very evident what happens when someone writes hate for PM Modi. See how many haters you have now. Count how many comments are in modi favour. Stop hating modi.
Ha ha ha… this individual thought he will find readership… people like him specialize in 2 phrases 1. “the devil is in the details” … and
 2. “Two wrongs don’t make one right”…
Dude aaj kal too many of us brown skins have learnt enough english and grown enough skin to give your nonsense back to you…
Both the devil and the wrongs … and perhaps the virus is in you… the likes of you are worse than evil…. hope the 500 out of 500 comments that write you off give you some measure of the delusion you are living under.
He gutter mouth Shivam, do your homework properly before blabbering. Extremely poor journalism
Only punishment for this Arthur is to read all the comments  regarding this article and decide what should be given priority.
Very negative mind set of this author .
He is prejudice in his decision.
There needs to be some guts to take such bold decision.  (Lockdown)
May b people will obey if leaders r not corrupt.
V need to b United.
A humble request ,Please don’t blame PM for your stupid mind, He has taken the right step, that’s why India is still safe, this gives everyone a buying time to take measures, and roll out meds, why don’t you think a little before posting such article, and who the hell are u to think about economy,if we are alive ,we can all work again and the economy will be back on it’s legs, I will request PM to ban all your stupid internet postings,you are instigating people to make chaos…don’t do that please…let PM modi and his team handle it they Are doing their best .
Even if Mr Modi says “The print is one of the best and author Mr. Vig is the most sensible practical truthful writer” these guys will publish that Modi lies… Sabaash.. very good journalism.. in the name of modernization of journalism, you guys give baised opinions which are not to be called opinions but only only fault finding mission with the intent of creating a chiaos (don’t know with what bad intent)… Why don’t these so called journalists stop being judgemental and start  just gathering and reporting the facts…if not just go for a holiday to Italy. You will learn there
Even if Mr Modi says “The print is one of the best and author Mr. Vig is the most sensible practical truthful writer” these guys will publish that Modi lies… Sabaash.. very good journalism.. in the name of modernization of journalism, you guys give baised opinions which are not to be called opinions but only only fault finding mission with the intent of creating a chiaos (don’t know with what bad intent)… Why don’t these so called journalists stop being judgemental and start  just gathering and reporting the facts…if not just go for a holiday to Italy. You will learn there how to control covid. If you return alive  pls write another article what you learned
Wasted attempt at flogging the dead horse of demonisation of demonetisation which definitely seems to have hurt none other than the author most. Modi greatness lies in the fact he has ignored these barking presstitutes and go on about implementing his vision for India.
Wasted attempt at flogging the dead horse of demonisation of demonetisation which definitely seems to have hurt none other than the author most. Modi greatness lies in the fact he has ignored these barking pre**titutes and go on about implementing his vision for India.
Are u mad or a moron
Hi
This entire report seems to be written with prejudiced mind without any knowledge and the only intention is anti Modi government without caring for the safety of the citizens of India .  Such articles should be banned and the author of this article should be sent to the primary school to learn the knowledge and wisdom.
Was The Writer on Weed While Writing this bullshit….? If  YOU really think that Mr.MODI isn’t doing what is good WHY DON’T YOU Come Out Of Your HOME and HELP the inflected Persons…
Shivam you not pathetic person and rude reporter. After reading this article I found one thing
You people only blame Mr PM.
Just go and see yourself. Inspite supporting each other in this  catastrophic event you people complete in misslead.
Anyway no one take your article seriously, There are many brilliant mind which are trying prevent this disease.
Hate mongering scare mongering are we?Seems like a few of them have been created just to malign the government.Nothing ever productive comes out of their mouth. No solution to any problem is thought about.These good for nothing houses will die a natural death.Karma works that way isn’t it? Spread hate and you will be hated.
Mr. Vij Get well soon, you are infected with a more dangerous Virus 😔. Feeling very sorry for you ! 🙏
Instead of helping nation the opposition parties are helping jihadis to disrupt law and order by blocking main roads and urging people to take to streets like Shaheen bagh all over India …they have showed that they ruled India on votes of 20% jihadis only
When people don’t pay taxes and are careless in their approach to everything important. Do you think Modi has a magic vand to generate funds for this massive task. I ask you a question.  How much is your contribution for this purpose? It is imperative that many may die unattended.  Are they not dying inspite of best medical care in European countries and now even in America. Please do your bit and refrain from negativity in difficult times.
Sure ,this is necessary to find the way of solutions inspite of wasting the time .
Economy is going down regularly and public facing unemployment issues.
Overall time is for seeking the solution of all problems and problems could be solved only with the adopting right way of worship of real God. For details you may watch the full video on below link
https://www.facebook.com/satlokashramnewschannel/videos/671407490292730/
The writer of this article is mentally unstable. And he need medical help from a mental hospital immediately
I found it difficult to read beyond first 2-3 paras; full of negativity and extreme bias. There is not just one word of praise for any actions of the Govt. By the way, what has the idiot author of the article done to alleviate the general public’s suffering or given any constructive suggestions for the same? Stop serving your masters whom the public now increasingly recognises. Go to Italy or any other country where you feel better efforts are being made to combat Corona. Shameless character!
I unsubscribe Print Media, who allow this type nonsense writer who misleading people.
LOL . The reaction from blind  bhakts  proves that the author has a  point.
Abey Naam nikhne m kya dikkat h..  I think author is also using comments section..
That’s true.That buffon also know this.Hell I feel the people who comment here can write much better articles that this buffoon.
Shivam Vij won’t save The Print from public wrath, but will kill journalism.
I have often wondered why such an experienced journalist Shekhar Gupta, who is objective despite his despise for Modi, gets people like Shivam Vij and Tasleema Nasreen to excrete on The Print. But I realize now that perhaps that is how he wants it. While he himself wants to protect his ‘objective’ credentials, he gets others to write anti-Modi stuff. Neat trick.
Shivam Vij is the noose by which The Print is going to hang itself.
This article is misleading indian people’s
Modiji is on right way & guiding people’s and governance properly
He is the hero of the world’s scenario
Don’t blame him
Show me any other leader in india capable more than Modiji ,i beat you won’t
What a perverted mind to criticise. You and your publication – both need to be admitted to a lunatic Asylum. Negativity has limits and you are spreading it like hell . You have no skin in the game and you write in your home comfort crap . May God give you some wisdom and protect this world from you .
This report is full of wrong and misleading details. Actually if you go by the internatonal Records, after the National Lockdown, India is doing much better than even the so called advanced European countries. This author is anti Modi which shows in his language.
We have to send him to  china or Italy.
We feel shame on part of us committed leader like Modi serving this type of use less persons.
The writer seem to be mentally ill or is infected.
Modi is horribly bad, as always!
Why is this author not coming up with brighter better ideas? Who is stopping him from such actions? Instead of criticizing an initiative why not come up with novel ideas?
China may have locked down only a particular province! Are we as sensible as them?? They followed the provincial lockdown! We are making merry even after repeatedly being told of the consequences! No one likes the way the police is handling the violations. But shouldn’t the public be sensible enough not to violate the imposed rule?? They need to follow the rule than test the administration of its efficiency in times of crisis. 
And if testing alone is the answer, India would need testing kits atleast 14 times its population. It’s not a necessity that the said virus pronounces itself on the first day itself.
The author should also have the common sense of not applying simple solutions on complex problems. Someone tested, someone took medication, someone else isolated only, so on and so forth. Each seems to be following what suits them the best. Why crib!  Also wouldn’t it be equally stupid if American rules are applied in India just because they succeeded there??
And if The Print is not responsible for anything and if it is all the author’s views, then why give a platform at all? The author can write his own blogs or columns!!
Article is completely nonsense…. You idiot writer see the situation of US, cared for economy not for the people…. And now it has 84000+ Covid19 cases most in the world.
It shows how many of them are here who was hired by BJP IT wing to defame the reality. Only they are the ones who will have money and all essentials now. Not the poor ones.
What a stupid and full of hatred article.
ये लोग मोदी जी के विरोध में देश के पीछे छोड़ देते है ।
Shame
Please delete this article. It creates wrong mindset. How can this type of article be published.
This report is based on false details and only to run propaganda against our prime minister. Shame on this report and writer of it.  India’s efforts to fight corona covid 19 is very effective and better than some advanced countries. Lock down is very effective now.  Government is doing good to control the problem and most of us are with our pm.
Shit write! Search for alternatives job!
Appreciate your views.. You dear friend have hit the nail on its head. You seem more capable being an unbiased journalist or a writer than those at print. God instill some sense in their brains. Need of the hour is positive thoughts and hope. If print can do neither better stay quarantined instead of spreading negativity.
Did your corona report came positive?? If not hopefully it get positive soon.
Block this foolish and misleading article.
I don’t think the critics really understood the virus or what the author is trying to say.  But then it’s stupid to expect logical thinking skills from Modi bhakts!!
The author’s point is, that without extensive testing, the virus is going to start spreading again, once the lockdown ends! The lockdown will be effective only if the 3 weeks are used to scale up testing and quarantine infrastructure, as well as the number of ventilators. Without that, the lockdown will not stop the virus, but will only kill a sick economy. 
While I wish the lockdown was in  place earlier, I agree with everything else the author is saying. Modi had mismanaged it completely. In his speech, he did not say that food will be made available, so panic buying killed social distancing! No relief was announced for the poor and businesses, so workers are walking home, potentially spreading the disease. Medical and protective equipment procurement has been a disaster. No plan was made on maintaining the supply chain. 
We had months to prepare. Rahul Gandhi gave a warning in February. We could have followed the strategies of the successful countries and made enough testing kits by now. 
The handling of this epidemic is revealing that Modi is the Pappu!!
This exactly is what the author of the article is trying to portray. All these,  posting  comments in such an irresponsible manner,  seem to be sick with Modi-virus.  Do heap praise on Modi, but see the other side of the coin too. Do not ask, what I would do if I were the p.m.  I would have done it, when I still had time.  I am afraid, the poor, having no access to food and water are on the verge of starvation and death Is it stupid, idiotic and irrelevant?
  The author rightly points out that the lockdown lacks meticulous planning and execution. Answer for the poor, hungry and thirsty daily wage earners on their way home and stranded, in millions.
Some sensible comment at last. No one is questioning the need for lock-down. But there were other measures that needed to be though through. Unfortunately the focus seems to be on mere optics. Bhakts are a bigger problem, with their inability to comprehend pretty much anything that is slightly different from the, “mantra” they have been brainwashed with. The net result is – all sensible feedback is getting drowned in the noise – exactly like it did during demonetisation.
Absolutely useless article it’s very easy to point fingers Mr writer when ur in pm shoes u will
   bricks before even deciding ur daily schedule 
There is no other option than to lockdown
Why don’t u dare to leave your address post writing ur opinion so that u can get the intellectual feedback personally
People like u disgrace to society and miss use the freedom of speech
I am sure u will not like my comments so it’s the same we don’t like ur views read the comments below
Stop spolling indias image and if someone in working hard like our pm if u cannot support don’t spoil his efforts
You can do what is best when u become a pm of a country like India with stupid like u who call themselves India 
Live and let live 
Jai Hind
Why this article is still up? Don’t they read the comments. Stop posting negative article.
With citizens like you, India will be back in the 1980s in no time. Good luck to you and your Modi
So every country who is doing this and suggesting this are just fools?
You just thinking about economy not the people. Get your mind out of the money side and than think.
What Modi did is absolutely correct. Who ever has written this article, has to sleep well then write. You just can’t write what ever you feel like.
I think if The print has so much nationalist thought it would be better to sell it and give the money to unemployed ppl now that will be better nation service than to run this junk biased org.
There was no other option but to lockdown ,  however the government failed to address the problem of migrant workers.  I saw a number of migrant workers walking on NH24 on foot to travel to their distinctions that is more than 700 kms aways from Delhi.  This happened due to sudden closer of Buses and trains. No doubt this is the responsibility of Central and State Governments as well to solve their problem. They were hungry too. Wealthy people don’t have any problem because they have money to manage their affairs  so some are passing comments but they must understand that India has big population of poors and they will die due to hunger before the attack of Corona. Here we are not discussing about Modi but the Government as a whole including Delhi Government.
What have you been doing at national highway? You should have given shelter to those traveling on national highway
Dumbest article I have ever read
Very true …senseless article….with no fact in it …in fact Modi govt is quickest and serious action oriented govt I have seen in India so far.
I agree to you …Akansha
Just a rant. Like one of those you tube comments. Lol
Agree.
Pathetic! I don’t want to see anu any article from the print. Will block.
One of the worst article I ever read.  The stupid writer doesn’t know what he writes.  Better he contracts corona virus quickly
Agree.
Pathetic! I don’t want to see anu any article from the print. Will block.
i agree with your statement.
USA is still thinking of their ECONOMY. trump said ” America is din ke liye nahi bana hai taaki pura economy stop kar de”
Aaj aalam ye hai ki pura USA virus ke chapet me hai.
i think ” log bhuk se tadap sakte hai, ek ummeed rahega ki log aa bhi jaeynge help karne ”
aur yadi VIRUS KE CHAPET ME AA GAEY toh log bhi ni dekhne ko milenge…
This is called poorest mindset of this writer…
And they can not do deyond this..
And they wiill die with this poor mind set…
Very sad to read this kind of article..
Where whole country is on one side to over come the situation.. And this writer on another side..
He even don’t know the meaning of “economy “….
Bhaisab jan hai to jahan hai…
Agar ye nahi samjha to aap dharti par boj ho… Ish se jada mai aap ki tarif nahi karsakta..
Nahi to mari alochna hogi… So sorry you will die with same mindset.. 🙁
Very accurate comment and assessment.
Mr. India, atleast have to guts to write your own name. The article is very much right. The lockdown imposed is not going to do any benefit. Neither the numbers will be contained nor he will win the admiration of people. This lock down is fuck all. Any of the policies have never supported or helped the country. I don’t know why b.j.p was given power.
Yes really poor mind set  writer’s
How much the writer must have earned from the instigator? Who could be the instigator?
Agree with you
Who is this.. Such idiot.. Back door passed author.. Just stop this nonsense.. If you can’t help then shut your mouth write and print
he is AAP’s dalal
Must be a staunch Modi-hater!
A lunatic born and brought up under extreme negativity. It is a pity that democracy gives such idiots also to express their perverse opinions.
This moron of a writer and his shit is worth a miss, if I had the chance to, I would ban this shit of news print
I couldn’t waste my time reading the entire blog. In the first few sentences I was like WTF did I just read!!! Was the writer on weed while publishing this article whileWFH???
Shame on you Shekhar Gupta, it’s not the dumb ass who wrote it’s people like you “padhe likhe gawaar” who allow such shit to be published.
For God’s sake please grow up from such cheap mindset,aese crucial time mein bhi kaese aap log ye sab soch lete hain…?!?!?
I’m really shocked to see such article particular at this moment,I think even anti Modi will also not digest this.
Be human and spread the positivity.🙏🙏🙏
You are not giving the facts by assessing the situation you are using your agenda of personal hatred in these dire situation.you should not spread these kind of studity in these situation.just stop manipulating the nation by your useless thoughts
By the way after reading all these comments writer in Coma..he is in mediacal emergency
By the way after reading aal these comments writer in Coma..he is in mediacal emergency
A biased explaintion of Modi’s lockdown decision. We r a big country with limited resources. In this backdrop,if we allow people to move freely it would have cascadning effect on the society. Spread of desease will be fast that nation will not be able to control that. Those European countries,which carelessely handled this corona virus r now suffering a lot.They r now helpless despite being rich n wealthy. There,may be adverse impact on our economy. But that is case with China,Italy,US,France,Spain n other countries. There may be shortcomings in this action. But given the enormity of the possible loss of life,this tough step would save the nation not only our lives but at the end of the make nation even stronger.
Sir,
These are the people who always keep complaining, and even they get served with very well facilities, they will still keep complaining, 
This guy is not helping system to improve, he is just complaining and in the tale of his article he have added all those old points to creep current government,
He is a verr very poor cheap mindset
Agree with you
Resources are in abundance the POPULATION NEEDS TO BE LIMITED. ALL PROBLEM SOLVED.
How senseless can u guys get???  Forget about Modi…. Can u doll something about the spreading virus ??? Look at the ratio at which our country is controlling the spread when compared to other advanced countries…. They are appreciating our strategies…. What the hell u guys doing talking rubbish… At least have u guys pitched in to do something for the people in the interim…. Tollywood actors are already pitching in with their donations for a cause… Learn something from them… And stop spreading your negativity to the people…  Sheyyyyy….  u guys are disgusting
U r talking like this coz u r getting all luxurious facilities in your room,m I right or wrong?
It is obvious that the information provided is totally biased how irresponsibly they are taking this pandemic in print media we are at do or die situation and they just got obnoxious intentions about our PM acting and showing solidarity to some low profile politicians we are happy that the way government is handling the situation if you really come across the correct figure of effected you will kick your own ass and look for bunker as far concern for economy if we survive again we start with renewed enthusiasm so don’t give damn inaccurate information.
Modiji is doing what is right for the country at this time, and he has already assured that people of country will not be denied access to basic essential things necessary for their survival, so the point that people will die of starvation is totally irrelevant!
And to be true, just sitting, commenting and blaming a person is very easy but to take appropriate steps nd decision in the favour of world’s second largest populated country is very difficult and requires a lot of deep consideration.
What could YOU have done if you had be in the power???
India does not have the best health infrastructure and it can’t be built in a day or 2 or so. But, I m very sure the our honorable prime minister is deeply concerned about the situation of country nd trying his best to do the maximum for the country. So, testing may also get started very soon as it is already in progress in some cities of Rajasthan.
But sorry to say, u just have misused the right of expression in the democracy to show your hatred towards Modiji and nothing else.
No concerns for people you have in actual.
I think you must also be aware about how much our opposition leaders are incapable enough to handle this situation who are still bickering about Modiji’s actions to be slow nd late.
So please you don’t do be IDIOTIC be SYMPATHETIC!
Apt reply to lutyens media critisism sitting in airconditioned office and writing nonsense in the name of press freedom.
After 21 days
1. Air quality of cities across India will sure improved.
2. All rivers will back to normal ( approx to good condition.
3. Back to Indian culture ( shaking hands not done Further).
Overall it’s good to nation.
If ppl are alive economy will reach to normal. By few days.
The great Swatch Bharath employees, doctors , scientists ,teachers , dedicated daily wage workers etc.
Every ppl of our country is a part of economy ,if they died due due to virus   who will improve economy.
Your negative article will give solution to this.
Health is wealth.
Now author got some information to write positive article.
Kindly consider  positively .
To reply /comment on such stupid article is insult to our brain. They have brain of Rahul Gandhi’s intellectual level. Do not waste your time in reading , commenting on such articles. PRINT is anti Modi, ignore articles and isolate them like Corona
Mr Vij
First get your IQ tested. Probability that you wilL understand what’s going around is ZERO. It’s not for you who sit on the sofas and write with limited or no knowledge.
You better be relax at home for 21 days, that’s best advice for your decimal capacity brain.
You would be really naive to think that the lockdown is going to appear before the vaccine comes. The author stinks of hatred for Modi which is okay. But have the facts right. Btw the finance minister has already announced the aid. You can not compare India with any other country. What options do we have, this bigot wants to roam around and if gets infected will blame Modi either way. Btw..what the f**k is meant by writing the views by the author are personal in footnotes. If the print is publishing it cannot be personal. If it’s personal then print it on a piece of paper and do what you are supposed to do after rolling that paper real hard.
I mean Disappear . Pls excuse the typo
Yes, testing is important…you need to get your IQ tested first. Pathetic writing!
He actually want that everything goes wrong and we have a big disaster.Nothing more or less than that.He want people to die so he can enjoy spewing hate on PM Modi.His arse is on fire because he can’t sustain steps taken by government.He is blind because of his hatred towards Modi.
Mr. Vij,
Do you have a better solution for managing this crisis considering :
1) Our limited resources
2) High population density
3) Federal structure that leaves healthcare, law & order in the hands of the states.
4) We can’t afford a 2 trillion dollar US style relief package.
5) Completely free and open media 
I for one agree with the decisions of the current dispensation. Imagine Ahmed Patel, Ghulam Nabi Azad in charge. They’d make a killing in this crisis
Commentators have more intelligence and analytics ability than the Author of this article. LIFE came first on the earth then came ECONOMICS, former once gone means gone while later could be restored. Safety of the people is most important, complete lockdown is only feasible solution. let me remind if it spreads,there is not even close to enough hospital beds for the patient,NO government in India could entertain such a large number of population.Better to save life….. lifestyle would be restored again.Dont worry about economics. It’s a daily practice of every individual.
Whole world is praising India for this move. Its not an easy move and needs courage and leadership quality like no other. With Modi’s right decision the country will win over this virus and the whole world will learn from it.
Whole world is praising India for this move. Its not an easy move and needs courage and leadership quality like no other. With Modi’s right decision the country will win over this virus and the whole world will learn from it.
Print journalism is bad and is full of Modi hate. Such a pathetic report.
Whole world is praising India for this move. Its not an easy move and needs courage and leadership quality like no other. With Modi’s right decision the country will win over this virus abs the whole world will learn from it.
Print journalism sucks with agendas and is full of Modi hate. Such a pathetic report.
Yes. Yes. We have some smart asses like you.. Who think ur the only one who has thought about all the aspects and the govt is bunch of donkeys.. Yeah..please be at home.. Stay safe if not save ur self.. Please save others.. And stop writing primarily..
Writer, please go in Public with leftist, so called intellectuals and idiot leaders. We want virus free India.
Nikalo is ko
Bullshit, pathetic… This shows the mentality of the writer, Our PM Modi Ji has done the right thing, to save the people of his country from this virus. Its our responsibility to help him by keeping all the instruction in mind. Think about the country at this time, keeo aside your own profits, and be responsible citizen. In my language people like you are called Big Morons.
I wish I was in the govt. First executive decision would be to close the print, the wire and the scroll. They are just negative media. Do you have any better ideas before you talk about this is wrong, this is bad. Totally irresponsible media. Maybe the ruling party wants a bit of opposition, else they would have shut you down. Grow up people. Give solutions!!!!!
Haha.. Gud one ! Note the author is SHIVAM VIJ.
Do you want virus  to spread across the country  and then starting lockdown. Modi has given priority to the life of his citizens. He could have even delayed the lockdown measures and let our loved ones died. Off course there will be economic impact, but is applicable to the whole world , India can’t be an exception. Today FM has announced economic packages as well. All necessary categories are addressed in the package  what we have seen other countries, they let older generation to die but Modi wants all of them to contribute towards the growth of this country He is a visionary ledger 
Print is a deadly virus than corona. Indians realize that
Dear Manisha,
You’d know theatrics as is evident from the article. It is as ornamental as it gets with little consideration to check for facts in a deliberate attempt to form public opinion and get easy publicity fast. Kudos. The increasing list of comments have gotten this otherwise useless piece a better viewership. you’ve cited Germany (adding 4-5k+ cases daily for last 4-5days) as a successful country that has fought corona. 
It is bleeding. We on the other hand have taken the fastest decision in the right direction with sufficient plans and measures for everyone. We have moved faster than the pace of virus itself. Providing healthcare encouragement, provisions, essentials. 
As a result the private sector, people have all come together to provide easy access to people for work for home and community Contribution helping the service staff.
If you still think other countries are doing better, please move.
Shut up andbhakt
Ur blind every single Indian supports govt steps.. Barking dogs like you
Shut up manda bhakta
What has been told by print in this article is a truth.  And in a crisis like this where health crisis has been converted to a administrative crisis Print tried to put this point before that at least the 130 crores house arrest people could imagined what the damage current Govt has been doing.  Because they r master on doing so as in past they have done so by shooting at the tyre of moving car @90kmph that’s what called Demonetisation. Complete lock down not a complete solution with curfew.
Well said
Thanks man for telling the insights. We do want to know how the medical facilities are updating in these lockdown days. The reach of information to the people is not correct and creating panic. I hope at least this time we people analyze things instead of  blind support.
Illiterate ho kya 😂
Go get your facts right
Virus can be contained if not cured.
#shame on ThePrint and his author.
You should be in jail.At a time when whole world is fighting with Corona you are busy in own agenda..If you had better option you should have come earlier ..when some one tried you got engaged in criticism just for your own agenda..If you have this mentality then do for nation some thing..just shut your mouth ..or go serve in hospital and work for saving humanity and give good name to your parents..
This article is preposterous & simply pathetic  and also reflects the mentality of the author..in these critical times,when the entire humanity is fighting for its survival, the prime concern of our govt has just been to save the lives of their citizen,one should applaud that such hard -hitting measures are being taken which is the need of the hour..we are fortunate enough that our govt is making such crucial & rather difficult choices about our well being & neglecting the economic crisis  that lies ahead rather than prioritising the economy which is being seen in pakistan.Irrespective of one’s political views,atleast for now, one should support & follow our pm’s efforts and initiatives & I am glad that most of our fellow  countrymen ( unlike the author of this article & your entire ‘the print’ team) have now started to understand & follow as well, the crucial decisions which have been implemented throughout the country.
Whenever I read any article from your media house, just one damn thought always comes across my mind – whatever our prime minister does, you guys have nothing good to write about, even any sincere effort made or measures being taken for the betterment of our country….I mean ..c’mon guys what’s your problem man.& Those of who express their views are simply labelled as bhakts.but let me clear it ,out of own rectitude that I have neutral political views, i just strongly feel that the steps which needs to be applauded and appreciated should be supported & wherever needed ,critics are always welcomed ..but every damn time..you guys have nothing good to write about..your articles are always soo negative,discriminating and apprehensive as if nothing good is happening or has ever happened in India in recent times.pls change this attitude,atleast for now,when all we can do to save our country is just to be safe at home & pray for our country and our frontline warriors..we need some positivity ..if you cant do that atleast donot spread this apprehension and negativity  regarding the lockdown & for a change you guys should write a positive article regarding the covid-19 relief package released for the poor economic sections of our society .we all know that WHO has stated that only lockdown is not the solution,but one should understand that this lockdown
is helping to buy some time for our govt & further limit the spread, & to isolate and contain the spread. .& considering our poulation as well as the population density , our medical infrastructure and the epidemiology of this disease…soo far the situation which has been contained till now  is highly commendable and I dont think that any other prime minister in the history of India could have been able to achieve what this man has done & is still doing..this time he has literally earned my respect as well as of the entire country..because such leadership with strong political will power is the utmost need of the hour ..even in social distancing our whole country has united.
Do u support demonitisation ?
Totally agree sir…. What a reply…
This article is preposterous & simply pathetic  and also reflects the mentality of the author..in these critical times,when the entire humanity is fighting for its survival, the prime concern of our govt has just been to save the lives of their citizen,one should applaud that such hard -hitting measures are being taken which is the need of the hour..we are fortunate enough that our govt is making such crucial & rather difficult choices about our well being & neglecting the economic crisis  that lies ahead rather than prioritising the economy which is being seen in pakistan.Irrespective of one’s political views,atleast for now, one should support & follow our pm’s efforts and initiatives & I am glad that most of our fellow  countrymen ( unlike the author of this article & your entire ‘the print’ team) have now started to understand & follow as well, the crucial decisions which have been implemented throughout the country.
Whenever I read any article from your media house, just one damn thought always comes across my mind – whatever our prime minister does, you guys have nothing good to write about, even any sincere effort made or measures being taken for the betterment of our country….I mean ..c’mon guys what’s your problem man.& Those of who express their views are simply labelled as bhakts.but let me clear it ,out of own rectitude that I have neutral political views, i just strongly feel that the steps which needs to be applauded and appreciated should be supported & wherever needed ,critics are always welcomed ..but every damn time..you guys have nothing good to write about..your articles are always soo negative,discriminating and apprehensive as if nothing good is happening or has ever happened in India in recent times.pls change this attitude,atleast for now,when all we can do to save our country is just to be safe at home & pray for our country and our frontline warriors..we need some positivity ..if you cant do that atleast donot spread this apprehension and negativity  regarding the lockdown & for a change you guys should write a positive article regarding the covid-19 relief package released for the poor economic sections of our society .we all know that WHO has stated that only lockdown is not the solution,but one should understand that this lockdown
is helping to buy some time for our govt & further limit the spread, & to isolate and contain the spread. .& considering our poulation as well as the population density , our medical infrastructure and the epidemiology of this disease…soo far the situation which has been contained till now  is highly commendable and I dont think that any other prime minister in the history of India could have been able to achieve what this man has done & is still doing..this time he has literally earned my respect as well as of the entire country..because such leadership with strong political will power is the utmost need of the hour ..even in social distancing our whole country has united.
Your reply could very well be on top instead of the usual smug attitude loaded articles like this that Print is used to churn out. Great reply Shivani!
I am not Bhakt
what happens after 21 days?
Yes, virus won’t disappear after that but at least it would be controlled spreading. Forced because of our discipline. 
WHO quarantine period is 14 days per below
https://www.who.int/publications-detail/considerations-for-quarantine-of-individuals-in-the-context-of-containment-for-coronavirus-disease-(covid-19)
With data modeling and other experts advise for the extra 7 days
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036533v1
Why should he worry about the economy?
Life is more important than money. What we can do with economy on grave yard.
Why couldn’t he have given some notice? Why couldn’t he have done his TV address at 8 am?  Don’t wanted to create chaos, which will lead to more loss as we are not disciplined.
Positive criticism is always encouraged.
Hopefully you may have better thoughts of implementation in this crisis and I can expect as your next article. But if you don’t have some implementation plan or approach don’t criticize without legitimate details.
Agreed
Vij or whoever the author is not thinking but jotting down basis what he heard of South korea story. He needs to first think on raw data:
1. Population – 150cr
2. Density per sqkm – 400 from small town/village to 15,000+ in cities.
Now compare the data from 31/Jan till now for many countries with even lesser population/density vs India. We may be ranked 17th to 20th in terms of risk or rate of increase in cases. Way behind most EU/US !!! Why ?
Its not because we have Kits etc. Its because government started cracking down quickly on this. The 21/Mar/20 Janatacurfew was trailer and it gave confidence to the administration for 21 days lockdown.
Now – lets take NY or Italy etc the number of beds per 1000 population is 3+ in US/italy. In south korea its 13. In India it is 0.7.
When you do your SWOT analysis, you work on your strength and opportunities, defend the threats. 15000 cr package to rampup bed/support will take 1-2months to realize. To buy time we would need to work on opportunity called social distancing. This is only way forward.  Check NY – it doesnt matter in their reserve they have 20,000 ventilators but NY alone needs 30,000 but are struggling. Same story everywhere. 
Here Health Infra is important but beyond a point it doesnt matter hence lock down matters. China is the story. This week and next week Govt will announce more measures.
Like said, its itchy fingers & non pragmatic minds when this article or report was penned. Wish Vij speedy recovery.
Excellent way to show the real data
Excellent way to show the real facts of the nation
The author just seems to be Anti-Modi . Had it been that lockdown wasn’t imposed and it would spread to millions killing thousands, the author would come up with an article titled ‘Modi govt failed in tackling coronavirus’, when we had a dense population lockdown shpuld have been imposed etc etc. Your hatredness has taken control over you. Please get a life author
I would not waste my words or time in this bull shit writing . All I would say is whoever write this the so called journalist is one of the dumbest who neither has clue about corana , not about India , not about Economy not about Germany, China,Turkey and other countries he used for comparison . #DumbJournalist #BullshitWriting
Stupid article  print deserves to be boycott ed
.
The writer of this article is either dumb to compare our country with those ones or too smart to attract the people to read it…to blame modi or govt is as stupid as blaming chinese for their eating habits…..State is doing all they can in their powers to control the situation including  …however it’s execution & implementation at real time is something to be discussed and looked into……suggestion for auther- Don’t waste your time in writing such stupid and unproductive articles ….rather invest your time in investigating the loopholes in implementation.
Again u proved that urs is a nonsense media. Without facts you imagine things, much worser Sean is you publisize it. 
Also you forget that Govt is clear that saving life of Indian is most important at this time.
You don’t want to quote it? 
Shame on you.
Again u proved that urs is a nonsense media. Without facts you imagine things, much worser Sean is you publisize it.
Shame on you.
Economy is an ongoing concept.. But life is not.. It will end one day.. It should not be ended bacause of Government decision … You may be a Doctor in Economics….Be a human first.
No one in India will be starved to death.. We have enough food to live for at least 6 months..with Little planning we can pass through this chaos.
Yeahh, it’s Modi’s mistake that he didn’t took your appointment and discussed with you how to approach this horrific condition.
If he would have given a full day then there would have been no point as idiots like you would have got onto streets to loot and there would have been roits. I’ve departmental store and we lost the stock on Friday itself with just rumors and u r asking about planning.
People can live 7,8 days without food but not with the virus idiot. So atleast think before you post something in public.
It’s a good time you’re at home learn how to think & write in this time it will help you.
Nice hard slap
Dear Mr. Idiot Author, First of all stop writting such baseless bogus articles against Modi Govt. Neither you are the PM (thank God for that) nor your opinion matters. The article shows that you are so jobless and bored so you are writting just anything to create more tensions in the country by brainwashing. But sorry it’s not working at all. Modi Govt is not a Stupid Zombie like you to take such a decision. You are talking about economy cause you still haven’t tested positive with Covid-19. Let the Smarts run the country with 1.3 billion and you keep your opinion to yourself and SHUT UP!
This supposedly know-it-all self proclaimed intellectual author and his best buddy Rakesh Monga (replying studpidly to every comment in this article) have decided to spew venom, oppose modi at all cost, cause mental disturbance between peacefully living Indians amidst the present crisis. These morons are the ones who are no different from a jehadi, who is trained from the very first day they enter the office of ThePrint to blindly follow Left Communist Propaganda and oppose the elected government.
These guys fail to understand how proactive Modi is. As per their claim, Nobody is dying from starvation. I presently live in a rural area of Tamilnadu, Essential needs like Rice, Atta, Milk, Sugar and vegetables are being distributed.  Our Councillor just annouonced that every house will recieve Rs. 5000 cash, 10kgs of Rice and Ration for Free, hence no need to panic.
Dont believe in the bullshit from these leftist authors doing nothing but causing confusions.
The author of this article seems to be hungry of publicity and attention. This shitty article is a manifestation of his shitty mind. The author is advised to get updated by the relief package announced by the govt. Such idiots should not be allowed to live in India.
You dog, go to china. You are worth for their food. You are not required in India.
Do you have better solution than our PM?
Vij used to a midicum of brain and integrity, but of late seems to have mortgaged his soul for pieces of silver! He does not show even common sense in his out pouring of hatred againsy Modi and BJP. Mr Vij stop it before you go completely mad!
This is worst kind of journalism where the journalist seems to  be running an agenda to derate/target Modi. In the past also  your articles are of same nature. You have right to hate Modi, criticize Modi but don’t play with lives of common people. Lockdown was need of the hour and this was perfect time to impose it. Many state governments have imposed curfue before Modi declared it. Then why you blame Modi only. So your article targeting Modi only shows your agenda.  This is like a vulture roaming around the sky to find its prey and the moment it notices the prey, it prounces upon it and devour it.
 Similarly  the journalist like you immediately pronce upon whatever Modi say/does something to derate him. This is not journalism.
Not even a handful of people are agreeing with this article. This itself would have made the author realise how senseless he/she is. I feel this idiot monga who is replying on others views and getting offended for the article, is the one who wrote this crap.
Although I agree that India does not have adequate PPE for healthcare staff and enough ventilators, beds and doctors for the population, it is bizarre to compare India’s  strategy to South Korea or Taiwan’s. The population density is incomparable. India needed a complete lockdown. It should have been earlier. Moreover,the government should have procured masks and pre expose prophylactic chloroquine tablets for healthcare staff which are being exploited by the general population.  Majority of people after coming from foreign travel have taken quarantine callously putting the society at grave risk.
I think this article has been written without understanding the approach of the government to deal with this epidemic. The core thrust of the policy decisions are that the mass spread of the virus can be contained. This is not a time to think about economic  losses or gains but we have to think about the losses this virus can give us, i.e. loss of human life. Economic losses can be made good but even one member from a single family can not be replaced.
And more so with the announcements made today by the Finance Minister, I hope the author has got his answers for which he has made so many speculations in the article.
The post shows anybody can write anything in India…nobody can have such independence in any other country in the world. Somebody rightly said that had it been in China, the editor and well as the article writer wouldn’t have been traceable. At a time when all the Indians have shown unprecedented solidarity, with the PM, such articles are setback and should be considered as conspiracy against the nation.
Very True, these people should be dealth with an iron fist
These are Lutian gang member’s writing such rubbish.
Agreed, these people just know how to abuse others, it’s Modi’s mistake that he didn’t took his appointment and discussed with him how to approach this horrific condition. .
If he would have given a full day then there would have been no point as idiots like you would have got onto streets to loot and there would have been roits. I’ve departmental store and we lost the stock on Friday itself with just rumors and u r asking about planning. People would live 7,8 days without food but not with the virus idiot. So atleast think before you post something in public.
You absolutely vile human being. You are actually advocating a journalist to be “untraceable”, because he wrote against the Nero lording over us. Just in case you forgot, in the middle of your Watsapp and FB inspired patritotism, Shivam is doing one of the basic tenets of a democratic country. The reason we need a 21 day country wide lockdown, that will bring down the economy to its worst in the last few decades, is because of the incompetence and lack of focus of your Daddy Modi. Instead of acting swiftly and testing people and quarantining them when we had the chance, Modi was busy engineering riots, CAA and illegally buying out MLA’s in MP. This could have been avoidable if it was tackled right from the start. And Shivam is also 100% right about lack of planning, which is the hallmark of this government. The chaos that you see of people panic buying, people rushing to get their rides home etc because of lack of planning and as days go by this is only going to get worse. But keep abusing journalists with death threats and dont question your own stupidity, because you have sold your brain to Watsapp and FB messages – that might change everything !!
Author is one of the person who think that people should die and we focus on economy. No one agree with you poor child. Try something else to criticize Modi govt all decisions irrespective of its nature. And by the way your agenda is also not working just like Rahul Gandhi.
agree with you…this kind of ppl should ideally be jailed for causing such scare
Is the author mad?
First go the mental hospital get your mind tested.
Shame on you
Print is run by noob writers such as yourself
At this situation when people’s lives are at stake
You are creating panic by stating things like economic doom
Fear mongering by journalists like you is the reason we have communal clashes and violent protests in our country
Need of the hour is to save our lives before the economy
Idiot
I really do not know who has this poor compilation statistics.  Mere testing.. Testing testing doesnt resolve the issue in preventing the spread of a viral disease.  The measures taken by the govt is so apt and an importnat step in controlling the viral spread.  The explanations given in this article is so unrelated and irrelevant . Please stop writing such baseless articles.
@MCauthor
Apna address de
Tere muh me coronavirus thoosne ko
Fir bataiyo kya sahi h kya galat
Bhadve
Watching this post makes me realize how lucky that you are writing such post in a democracy with free speech… If you were in China you would have disappeared by now… And that would have been a good thing… You are free to post your views… But please don’t poison people’s mind… Shame on The Print for posting such nonsense..
I am glad you benchmark Indian democracy against Chinese  Totalitarian Communism
Stupid article. Just ignored.
Stop this kind of  stupid articles. Modi has chosen his people’s life not money. He is a great leader India ever had. So stop spread such stupidity.
I think the WHO should be disbanded or handed over to our ‘greatest ever leader’  He will ‘choose’ lives over money worldwide and finfish the virus single-handedly.  Labs, tests, science, in general, is a complete waste of time. All we need is our greatest leader who has asked the virus to go away after 15 th April!
I swear whenever i will meet this traitor author in person, I’m going to give him unlimited slaps on his face.
You should join the Indan police force. They are good at training in these skills.
The author seems to be far away from the ground reality. we are densely populated country and the magnitude of this disease if spread, is going to be unstoppable. The government is also aware of the resources that it has so it is trying preventive techniques rather than going into cure impact. And why all responsibilities fall on government. Mr. author why not we encourage ourselves to help poor and needy living our nearby places. If I talk about Politics and hidden agendas, we will find Jaichands in bulk in India. only motive I see in opposition and its supporters is criticism and no support.
You appear to have inside information on the government’s plans to combat the virus and deep on the ground data. Please share
The illiterate rants of the Modifellating Bhaktonazis infesting the comments aside, more people have already almost certainly been killed by Modi’s lockdown than by the virus. Which is, really, not at all a particularly dangerous virus, with a mortality among healthy adults far below influenza. The thing about the Modi regime is that it only understands media management. Nothing else is important to it. State elections? It’ll buy the politicians to form the government even if it loses. State elections are immaterial. National elections are all about media management. And that’s all the Modi regime cares about.
Such view point can only be of an anti-national ist. You are worse than the author of this article who appears to be insane
This lockdown is necessary and should have been brought much earlier after strictly quarantining the international arrivals. Without people there will be no economy to build. Modi as a PM should have addressed much earlier before 12th March well before Rahul Gandhi’s warning : “while u were…”, PM and Karnataka CM wanted the dissent congi MP MLAs to travel and stay in Bangalore, secure their MP Govt, before announcing lockdown in Bengaluru, for this deceit many somebody’s are going to get paid ,if not by people then by God’s judgement thru nature. Already the MP & all India covid count is on the rise for all the delay due to political drama.
Who is this bloody rascal author and disturb mind editor. How can this type of articles even published at this time.
Please publish your stable minded research  instead. All of humanity is dependant on it.
Gadha comments pe comments kiye ja raha XD
I am not Bhakt
what happens after 21 days?
Yes, virus won’t disappear after that but at least it would be controlled spreading. Forced because of our discipline. 
WHO quarantine period is 14 days per below
https://www.who.int/publications-detail/considerations-for-quarantine-of-individuals-in-the-context-of-containment-for-coronavirus-disease-(covid-19)
With data modeling and other experts advise for the extra 7 days
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036533v1
Why should he worry about the economy?
Life is more important than money. What we can do with economy on grave yard.
Why couldn’t he have given some notice? Why couldn’t he have done his TV address at 8 am?  Don’t wanted to create chaos, which will lead to more loss as we are not disciplined.
Positive criticism is always encouraged.
Hopefully you may have better thoughts of implementation in this crisis and I can expect as your next article. But if you don’t have some implementation plan or approach don’t criticize without legitimate details.
So do you have a better solution to stop the covid 19 spread in india?  The lockdown is the only option.we can’t compare our india to turkey and singapore because, We, indian citizens, we have very less self decepline. So when government told us to self isolate ourselves we didn’t do that so now this is the only way.it is just like when you were child, your parents asked you to do some chore ,but you didn’t do it when they asked you to do it the first time And then second time and then third time so your parent had to scold you to get it done. And about the economy, the whole world is failing at economy due to this pandemic. So what,We can just get it back up.
WHO solution: Test and isolate. Try reading before reacting.
Mr. Monga has gone nuts, it seems… Test and Isolate. That’s correct. But some Indians testing positive aren’t isolating themselves, these sick minded are going out on streets to make others tests positive too. So shut up!
People like you are the ones working against the country. Rather than writing loads of bulsh** can you do something to improve the situation. Say something positive considering so many people are working hard to save the country. Or lese keep quite.
The county isn’t an island unto itself. This is a problem for all of humanity at the moment. Try reading before reacting and you will see the positive suggestion in the article i.e spend more on PPE and Testing. Unfortunately, the virus is not an Indian nationalist that will go away on April 15 because PM Modi asked it to.
Completely agree.
Your thoughts are as lethal as coronavirus to our nation.
JUNK
You seem to have figured it all out.  Please share your research
I am not a Modi supporter but this article just shows you can write anything against someone you don’t like! Lockdown isn’t poorly planned. It is probably the biggest decision Modi had to take and he will be remembered for this. Public health is more important than anything else for a country. Never compare a huge nation to tiny places like Singapore or HongKong or even Korea. Why didn’t you compare with US or Germany or France?
Stupid article,
 modi has taken the right decision at right time.
This news agency writer want to take reverse advertisement for his news . 
Don’t waste others time and your time.
Scrap article. And nonsense posts.
All this because of freedom given to newspaper in India.  Try this in China, by now you would be hanging.
Shivam Vij… I think you should do mental check up..Jab ghar pe aag lage tab pehle Jaan bachao, paise toa firse kama lenge.. 
I think you dont get enough attention to your articles hence you are spreading such nonsense. You seem to be worst depression case. Use your articles to spread Positivity and Hope rather then hate.
What makes you say poorly planned. Have you seen what italy, spain , Germany , UK are going through.. Use your brains. India is so diverse and so much populated that Corona can become ten times more disaster for us. Shut down is the only option to control it. To slow down the process is the only way to deal with it. European countries being so advanced and they dont have enough facilities. Nobody knows how to deal with Corona.
And if you really want to write articles then do your duty and write articles on how some scoundrels are raising prices of Bulk drugs and Sanitizers and Masks. These are selfish people and these are the people making the economy drown. 
And if you want to write articles then show how Indians have come together to fight this..How people are helping each other,how people are making this efforts..
Jab Corona tere pichvade main gusse ga na tab yehi doctors aur nurses tuje help karenge..teri economy nahi..
Tere dimaag ko gutne se uppar sir pe leke aa
Backchodi editor
You seem to have a deep understanding of what Italy, Spain Germany and the UK are going through. I didn’t realise that the Doctors and Nurses didn’t need any PPE.  I also didn’t realise that a daily wage earner can earn his lost money back at any time. If only there were a few more people like you in this world, the virus would be no threat to us at all as it would try to enter from the rear end of the body and die by itself. Please publish all  your research it could be the world’s only hope.
I have something to tell here,  as this is the national emergency, Y can’t we ask our MLAs to contribute money if each MLA contributes Rs 1crore each  we don’t need any financial  help from PSU…
Dear Author,
Please run the nation for a day and let us all see.
Regards,
Your friendly neighborhood
Coronavirus
The author should atop writing… Such a pessimist!
The PRINT has only agenda …..ANTI-MODI Government ..and they lacked the facts
blanket testing is costly and spreads panic. if there are false negatives it might provide a false sense of security and encourage them to interact with more people. testing more people increases the possibility of false negatives. so it is not gonna help.  
its true Modi has to care about farmers. its been 3 DAYS!! do you think he is god? even a country like the USA cannot handle their shit properly, at least we’re trying to control the virus. you’d rather we all die than stay at your goddamn home for 15 days?
This has got to be the most ignorant, politically motivated rant that I have seen in a while. In a time where the need of the hour is to spread positivity and uphold the policies specified, this idiot is out here writing such nonsense. To top it of, they are expecting up to subscribe to their you tube channel. Wasted 2 mins of my life reading this crap. No more!
Testing is important. But you have to understand that testing a billion people in such huge demographic is no easy task. India is still better than its European counterparts. Please don’t site example of China, who has a long history of manipulating numbers.
Mr. Shivam all your thoughts are good it’s easy to pen down what you derived at ur mindset ……but but but u must first understand what is a virus and for the people’s interest what must a caretaker that’s the PrimeMinister must initiate to safe guard his country and his people can take any emergency decision which you call nonsense…whatever he has done out of his powers till today initially people might have faced some difficulties but later they are back to a better normal life being educated  is maximum.  If a kid does something wrong we should punish him at his earlier age rather allow him to spoil his family state country and the world…hope u understood ..I request you to understand and better understand the moves of your PM and take it in good terms  so that we are all one at all crises when it comes to national level…always bitter is better than sweetness ..Jai Hind
You sound similar to Imran Khan, ” We don’t fear coronavirus as much as we fear chaos.” And they are doing exceptionally well to combat the disease.😉
Right. Jihadi crack will save indian….Like the one print smokes.
The author should be in jailed right now just blow up his mouth about the taking right steps of government to save us just get him in a jail right now!
Utterly non sense headline. Understand the transmission of this virus, India could have been next Italy or USA. Steps taken by centre and state governments needs to be appropriated. The reason behind the italy’s death massacre is the non cooperation from its citizen which has cost Italy on almost every aspect. I accept the point that economy will have to face a heavy toll but also note in such scenario every business person will get the opportunity to earn as government will introduce several flexible reforms.
Also note Brazil and USA are withdrawing lockdown which will show its Ill effect soon
Kindly have a good knowledge and ideas before your baseless criticism.
Dear writer/ Editor, 
Your pathetic, nt only coz u cant see how world over is appreciating India for its efforts. But you have become blind hating him and forgot that you have started misleading and hating our own country. People like you should be handed over to countries lile China .
I am glad at least you are keeping your senses about it all . Ignorance indeed is bliss
Monga….
Go to hell….
At this time wherein the country or I should say the world is going through such a crisis we have this gentleman who is sitting here and criticizing the steps taken by the government and as a platform this is allowed to go online that’s also what is really bothering me. What exactly as a responsible citizen are you doing Mr. Vij. For a country like India with a population so huge do you think it’s that easy to do testings of individuals as suggested by you.  Please rather than sitting and writing these articles which just spread negativity would request you to do some responsible journalism at this time.
Author ki toh lag gayi..
Stupid article
Well written article! Of course the spineless bhakts who need a mystic hero cum father figure to feel enslaved is not going to like it. I have spent days and nights wondering what went wrong to have such stupidest people in India.
Do you know how disciplined we are as compared to ital and USA? No one will survive if modi hadn’t shown is leadership brave quality to stop 1.3 billion people.. aor sun L teri koi jarurat nahi hai desh ko tu pehli fursat mein nikal .. zyada akal hai tou khud pm bano..
AGLA PM TU BAN JANA……BIG DEAL…
Please don’t create panic by posting such articles…. please afraid of that Super Power……God…..
Agle chunav me terko e vote denge. But abhi chup hoja anti nationalist.
The Author needs to know you are in a lower middle rung country with 1400$ gdp. Here people will not evaluate sense or think. They will get mad at you for blaming Modi and follow the diktat. But these people are best lead by the pied piper as it must. Ive given up on sense in this country. Why worry. If the people are brave and intelligent they will be raised. If the people are fearful and mindless they will pay for it. Did you know cattle keeps breeding, living and dying happily and never knows its cattle cos its cattle. These are cattle people and you are comparing them to humans whose intellect gets them 50,000 to 100,000 Gdp per capita. If here people were that smart India would already be Singapore and we would have done already what you said Singapore did.
Don’t expose your ignorance fillled Bigotry against India. Testing wildly and blindly all over  ,that too 1.3 billion people is lunatic and stupid. It’s like finding a hair in a sanddune. India is following most scientific and rational protocol:  Testing at source of ingress thatbis airports , stations, contact tracing, random testing of suspected clusters, quarantining all with travel history, tagging and reporting, prophylactic treatment of close proximates, scaling up medical infra on war footing , pooling and redistribution of available resources, roping in private and PSU corporates for aggressive manufacturing of  ventilators, conversion of existing infra as standby hospitals most importantly enforcing SOCIAL distancing through complete lockdown… All this to flatten the infection spread curve below the Resources line.  See the results on ground. Most world leaders and WHO praising Modi/ India for it’s oro active steps  Dead bodies don’t lie, numbers match with infection spread rate. We have free and a highly govt hostile media to snoop around if fudging happens.
So keep your stupid  Western media / countries influenced mentality against India to yourself, stop casting aspersions based on speculative theories. Your MHS fellow are like most idiotic western raised bums who have no connect with Indian reality.
Yes, India is sitting on a potential catastrophic bomb due it’s massive population. But that’s what PM Modi is seized of. He has best professionals to advice,not stupid rantsters like you.   If you are in one of EU or US, better save your own backside, stop worrying about India. We can take care ,either way.
First off! You day that there were sudden pneumonia deaths! How many?! And then extrapolate that to the probable estimated number of underlying cases.
    You are not a genius in figuring out that there are more cases, but you have missed the “nitty gritty” as you so fondly mention.  Secondly, stop publishing things out of a pure agenda and try to show the real picture, as is the true measure of a journalist.
    Most importantly, the article lacks substance, numbers backing your bigoted claims, sources for those and is nothing but the mad ravings of a deranged person who is more than happy to make a buck out of this situation even if the article ( even if true) could tip the balance in the pandemic’s  favour.
 So thanks for nothing , Dickhead
Rakhi Sawant of journalist. Just need publicity by creating controversy. I think the writer didn’t took into consideration the impact on economy if Corona spreads throughout the country. Half baked knowledge is more dangerous than having nonknowledge at all.
This author Shivam Vij is biased and mentally unstable. Hardly has any idea of the ground reality. An anti modi fella for sure. Surely needs help. Check and recheck the facts and then publish a feed stupid. If not lockdown, what would have been the best possible solution to save millions. Please enlighten us.
This author Shivam Vij is biased and mentally unstable. Hardly has any idea of the ground reality. An anti modi fella for sure. Surely needs help. Check and recheck the facts and then publish a feed stupid. If not lockdown, what would have been the best possible solution to save millions ? Please enlighten us.
This author “Shivam Vij” is biased and mentally unstable. Hardly has any idea of the ground reality. An anti-modi fella for sure. Surely needs help. Check and recheck the facts and then publish a feed. If not lockdown, what would have been the best possible solution to save millions ? Please enlighten us.
It is really very unfortunate that in this country in the name of freedom of expression and speech it is very easy to write all such stupid things, which the author has in his mind. Even when the world appreciates the efforts taken by this great Indian leader we have a mean minded guy writing this article at this hours of difficulty. Later we will also come to know that this author is a paid assistant of some dirty political opponents. God bless this nation from such parasites
Wish he was on the streets with some constructive solutions,  instead of writing a ignorant article like this  with his balls hanging lose.
Recently Turkey has seen more than 500 cases in a single day and condition in the Germany is too worse they have seen rise of more than 4000 new cases in a single day and these numbers are getting consistent now. It seems like you’re paid off by opposition parties to talk or lie, only about the things that are not in favour of the ruling government.
Is this about covid-19 disaster remedy or a political article against PM.
Author please  take the print out of this article roll it roll it again roll untill it is sharp and tight and shove it in your……
Does this idiot knows what he is talking about, absolute bs.. hello congi licker instead of understanding serious of matter, don’t lecture
We have a saying in Kannada, that,” ಪಕ್ಕದ ಮನೆಗೆ ಬೆಂಕಿ ಬಿದ್ದರೆ ಅದರಲ್ಲಿ ತಮ್ಮ ಬೇಳೆ ಬೇಹಿಸಿಕೊಂದರು.”
  This author is cooking his food with the fire on next house.
God bless him and us all.
Dear brothers and sisters , let us be United to fight against this virsus by staying back at home and manage with things what is available.  Let us pray a lot for the entire world and prove our humanity by good deeds even after the problem is solved. Let us be a good citizens of our nation.
As of today morning, Singapore has gone into a complete lockdown,and it’s miniscule compared to India…so let’s have a plan of action from you.
What rubbish the author has written. Middle finger to these type of Authors. Requesting to please remove this content.
Please don’t publish whatever non sense comes to your mind. When you criticize, you have to come with a solution also. When you look at the Corona india tracker, all the states and the UT are affected, how you lockdownown a single state or UT ? I think you are paid to publish this rubbish to gauge the mentality of Indians.
Are there enough protective equipment for health care workers? Is India more testing? Testing is critical to combating Corona-virus. It is like there is is invisible fire but you don’t know until you do testing. ‘Time is of the essence’. 
What is priority of Modi govt talking about Rs 20,000 cores for Central Vista and only Rs 15,000 cores for Corona-virus? These are testing times for every one but more for Modi govt.
Nothing new, we know we have some senseless journalists/authors. Have a look at other countries where lockdown is not taken serious and the seriousness they are facing now. Modi speech did convey the same. And fools like you should know he had to convey the seriousness of the problem to the people first. Moreover fyi groceries shops are open 24/21 as of now. Have some sense before even writing something. It’s not support to modi. It’s efforts to control billions of people from pandemic disease. If you really have to post something highlight those what govt has to do after lockdown to stop this disease from spreading or solving any challenge govt is not unable to do. Give your suggestions rather than pulling of the decision.
this article represents the mental illness of both the author and this site as well as they posted it.
To the idiot author i would suggest that leave india and live in Germany or china so as to live in 2020 economy not in 1980.
lastly i hope you will die of corona because of these lack of facilities in India
RIP
I guess the writer lives in a different India. The writer has shown by this post that the writer has no idea about ground reality in India and other nations when it comes to coronavirus. I hope this post is removed immediately as this is the most stupid post till date I have read on such a critical pandemic issue. More importantly, it seems the writer and The Print want more of an attention than providing actual facts and real data in this article. Seriously, no sense of responsibility, maturity in the writer
People like this should be put in jail or may be hanged for spreading panic and FIR should be file,these poor pathetic journalist telling a largest democratic country government how to run shame on your cheap journalisam, government have army of qualified people for advice and do the best,this PRINT is shame for us they would always write against Modi and government but pls not at this point of time,PLZ BOYCOTT PRINT(Paid news media)
I know a guy who can fix your thinking skills.
Just drop me an email so that I can fixan appointment with him through a video call
This is a perfect example of misuse of freedom of speech and rather a tantamount to hate speech. People like this author should not only be banned from spreading such vague facts and poorly constructed information but also some strict action to teach the likes of this a good lesson before spreading such misleading and toxic messages in public against the national interest.
Saw heading of the article and opened it to condemn it and The Print. Happy to see that public has already voiced the dissent vociferously. Just want to add that 99.99% of the businessmen would not have closed office doors if this step was not taken putting common man’s life. At least as a common man, if not as a supporter of humans, we should be thankful for this decision.
Dear Shivam Vij, Please suggest an alternative way or shut the f*** up. If countries like USA & Italy(which have one of the best medical facilities in the world) are suffering then just consider the impact of this disease in India.
It’s a lockdown & not a party announcement that you will be informed weeks earlier.
We all know how strictly China dealt with this disease and that’s why the death rate is declining there.
And talking about economy, it can rise again only when the people of the country survive.
An article that made me puke out of disgust.
Forget the economy for once, the health of our citizens is more important you fool.
The print deserves nothing less than a ban !  Bunch of jerks, hv never seen a positive article from them.
An article that made me punk out of disgust.
Leave the economy for once, health of the citizens is of utmost importance you fool.
A very interesting article. Keep writing this type of articles. Do not worry about comments of modi’s slaves. There are real Indians who appreciate this type of brave writings. Go on.
This a article is dangerous than corona virus. Virus will spread to few people however this article will spread negativity to ten times more of them. In such times,should you talk all that or come up with solutions and do activities that help humans who need it in such dire times. Dear author, you messed it. Please share your name, we will make you famous..
modiji is only guruji of india less qualified.best way was to isolate people above 50 year at home and  govt should pay attention for testing  and supply of good diet for everyone.sorry for india corona is spreading .older andalready ill and poor people will face lot of problem.govt officer   and netaji shall be crorepati and people of india getting poor.lot of fund will be distributed but like always going to the pocket of netaji and officers. sorry people kalyug mai crow  only win.
Dear shivam vij ,
Couldn’t read your article beyond the first paragraph. You need to stop writing and go into SELF QUARANTINE .
Print always follows communist ideology. So nothing new. Go out physically to any Center and check real situation.
A fool has the right to  blabber. But the publishing house has the responsibility to censor this kind of stupid content, particularly in the te of crisis..
What a waste of everyone’s time, the print has nothing to print it seems.
Lockdown from print before their psychological virus to which they take no owners since it is someone’s else’s opinion which is always the case (it sounds like China and corona, originate / hide/ spread but dont blame)
Am not a Modi supporter but this idiot who writes such stupidity and the ppl who publish such drivel should be prosecuted. Indians have been high on following democratic values and are drunk on freedom of speech but journos and such drivel mongers must face the full force of law in these trying uncertain times the nation is facing. If it was upto some such ppl will be And rightly should be lynched on the streets for being stupid and free.
This messed up print is a joke
Due to coronavirus people are dying. It is not worth to save economy at the cost of humanity. Money is not everything.  Modi ji is doing right thing at right time. History will remember him.
In Gita it is written ” karmanye vadhika rashte ma faleshu kada chana ma karm fal hetur bhur ma sango sarva sat akarmani
really absurd, stupid, anti national thought. please keep your viewpoints with you, we don’t need such seasoned opinion , Modi has taken the right decision , social distancing is the need of the hour.  I agree your article shows you are anti Modi but please do not spread wrong information and hatred in this situation.
Please remove this useless article. The author does not have any practical solution. He should be kept in isolation.
What a foolish view. Don’t put your mentally retarded comments. We know what push you guys to put such article
Rubbish. Nothing else. Expected Print to have a neutral view at least now.
Paid article, paid journalism …  anti modu is the only agenda that few media comapnies have nowadays.
A country where PM is a tea seller and every  other think tanks have no idea or whatsoever in medical knowledge.
What else do you expect?
This is the best we can provide from our country, this is what our system produces
Garbage in and garbage out.
The author is useless and does not have a understanding of the situation.
Very soory to get a such baseless artical printed on the reputed information portal like The Print
Hope they will have some standards at least in such difficult times
The author is useless and does not have a understanding of the situation.
Very soory to get a such baseless artical printed on the reputed information portal like The Print
Hope they will have some standards at least in such difficult times
ओह भाई सस्ते लेखक , या तो तुम भांग पीते हो या कोई कांग्रेसी बैक्टीरिया से तुम्हारी दिमाग़ी कोशिकाएं क्षतिग्रस्त हो चुकी हैं ।। इस जगह मास्टर राहुल आयु 51 वर्ष होते तो बात चिंताजनक होती हमारे लिए, परन्तु आज श्रीमान नरेंद्र भाई मोदी है तो डरने वाली बात नहीं है, देश को बचाने के लिए उनके प्रयास सरहानीय हैं, क्योंकि कुछ आप जैसे लोग भी जो नकली एजेंडा लेकर बाहर निकल जाते है और लोगो के आगमन भयावह स्थिति बनाने की कोशिश करते है, और फिर मुह की खाके वापिस लौट आते है ।। हमे हमारे प्रधान सेवक पर गर्व हैं क्योंकि हमें पता है वो 24 घण्टो में से कम से कम  16 18 घँटे भारत के लिए सोचते हैं ।। आप अपना लेवल थोड़ा बढ़ाये अपने क्षेत्र में जाए थोड़ा मोटिवेशन दे कब तक इन छुटमुइये लोगो के साथ में पत्रकारिता करेंगें।।
Well, you could have suggested in advance to  Modiji what  is best for our country
This author is stereo type Congress infected virus. The theme came from AICC and Sonia  ‘s think tank.
How can he relate this war like situation with GST and Demonetisation.
We can’t just follow what Singapore or Germany or any other countries. As the demographic nature is different need our own solutions and handling methods.
Shiy
I congratulate the author for writing this article. It takes courage to write the truth at a time when the population of the country has been blinded to it.
Truly, this lockdown is useless without testing. And the government is terribly slow at testing and is not tackling testing urgently enough. So we are just shooting ourself in the foot while not doing anything to tackle the crisis. The results of these actions will be seen in 2-3 weeks when we have a large number of cases and a ruined economy with hyperinflation and supply disruptions
How can you think like that? How can you write something like that? Do you think this will make you recognize for good?
By a quick decision modi has saved the lives of atleast a few thousands and possibly a million. We ll not debate the numbers until this menace crosses its stages to a completion. But can we not take the responsibility of economic rebounce in the next few weeks.
Or should we take best opportunity to attribute the entire global recession to india and blame modi for that.
Please gather some insight into the subject and be fair in criticism.
It’s true that there will be many economic problems coming up in future. But will it really effect those who already have adopted sticking to basic needs of life. Yes for people with lavish lifestyle, it may effect. Nobody speaks about population explosion in India. 130 cr with majority of tax chors in India. How is Govt going to curtail all this keeping in view on going expenditures in country other than this pendamic. We will keep on expecting developed country like treatment with such a huge population. We don’t know how government is going to take care of us but do nothing to reduce our population.
Perfectly worded for the situation! We are truly on our way to re-discovering the famed zero!!
This person should be sent to Italy to know whether  modiji has took the right decision or not. It is your point of view but at least think and then right. This country can only be saved by a person like modiji..
Dear Shubham ,
Please refrain from writing such politically motivated article in this difficult time when there exist the danger of pandemic looming large.
This is very bad
The author has spit venom to adress his own griviences. Such a immature and foolish article. His aim was just anti modi chant. Shame on the author for choosing such a time to rant nonsense. His article indicates the low standard of novices who contribute to Print and r entertained by Print.
These writers are those who want to see India going through 3rd forth fifth sixth and and many more stages of covid-19. He knows if lockdown is imposed then India will recover earlier than it should be. So these people who are sitting on huge piles of medical kits will get nowhere to sell their medical stuffs.
US paid more attention to giving economic policies. Look what a mess they are in. Economy will only come into picture if we all live. Nobody knows when we will come out of this. Economic packages could be thought at the end after gauging the impact. You don’t know the realities. All supply chains are fully working. There is no need to test all those who are healthy and fully quarantined right now. Tested with negative results today doesn’t mean you will not get infected tomorrow.
Dear so called editor
R u live in india or not.?
Do u know anything abt economy?
Pls do check ur facts and figures.
U suggested testing
Di u know how much testing Kit’s cost.
And in india testing of bottom line people and first reach them is how difficult.
After that isolation of these people is another problem.
In mean while how can any one stop spread of corona virus.
There r many more hurdles.
So pls look both sides of coin then make any statement.
The Print Stop your anti India propaganda.
The Print, name itself is enough to understand the hidden agenda. ..
Even I, who is feeling bad for the unorganised sector during the 21 day lockdown, can’t help but feel malice from this blog. Youve filled all your negativity and anti-government ideas in a single page in the guise of a coronavirus post. Heck, you dont even care if people die of hunger during this period. This is just throwing crap at the government — give them some credit for trying so hard — at least, leave some positive ideas which may be of some use.
Such useless posts should not be posted online amid such a crisis. What we need are the ideas optimistic good hearted people and not slashes from idiotic seditionists.
Even I, who is feeling bad for the unorganised sector during the 21 day lockdown, can’t help but feel malice from this blog. Youve filled all your negativity and anti-government ideas in a single page in the guise of a coronavirus post. Heck, you dont even care if people die of hunger during this period. This is just throwing crap at the government — give them some credit for trying so hard — at least, leave some positive ideas which may be of some use.
Such useless posts should not be posted online amid such a crisis. What we need are the ideas optimistic good hearted people and not slashes from idiotic seditionists.
Even I, who is feeling bad for the unorganised sector during the 21 day lockdown, can’t help but feel malice from this blog. Youve filled all your negativity and anti-government ideas in a single page in the guise of a coronavirus post. Heck, you dont even care if people die of hunger during this period. This is just throwing crap at the government — give them some credit for trying so hard — at least, leave some positive ideas which may be of some use.
Such useless posts should not be posted online amid such a crisis. What we need are the ideas optimistic good hearted people and not slashes from idiotic seditionists.
This article is ignorant.
Any other reaction would’ve resulted in another Italy. Don’t underestimate the density of population in India.
I request the website to remove such negative articles.
Stupid article.. How can u write like this when country is facing such a crisis. . Modi know
 Very well what he is doing and the people have full faith on him..
Wrong report with a misleading direction.
Any other reaction would’ve resulted in another Italy. Don’t underestimate the density of population in India.
I request the website to remove such negative articles.
This article shows the poor mentality and narrow minded approach of the author towards the prime minister and all his policies, this article is  nothing but a personal outburst of the writer . The print should think before publishing these whatsapp forwards type material.
Misleading.
EVEN IF by the chance of 0% EVERTHING HE Wrote is CORRECT… but at this moment article on how to help the nation are more important than articles on how to divide or spread hatred or criticize with zero credibility.PLEASE OFF LOAD THIS ARTICLE
PEOPLE NEED HOPE AND POSITIVITY NOT DOUBT AND NEGATIVELY IN THEIR LEADER IN PRESENT TIMES.
BE SENSIBLE.
BE A SAVIOUR NOT A REVOLUTIONARY.
This is journalism of 2rupees people and quality of article is 3rd class and cheap. Clearly the writer is of sick mentality who think economy is much important than health. Writer lacks basic common sense and is not well researched on topic. Writer should take rest at home rather than bullshting on internet. Theprint journalism is like sht…
Why do you always spread hate?  Is this journalism? Better stop doing journalism for spreading hate or else quit.
We need an apology from the Editor in Chief of the Print for such a preposterous article. The reaearch out into it is zero and clear political allegiance is oozing out of it. I can understand yours is a leftist media house but spreading misinformation and defaming the govt. Just to satisfy your leftist readership is borderline unprofessional. Who said that testing for vaccines are not happening in India?? Who said that there is not a lockdown in other countries?? Telling people that Modi’s decision will effect economy not the virus is factually incorrect. The whole world economy is at a standstill right now and where other countries are prasing India, you are lying about the consequences of the steps taken by the govt. We need a published apology by the Editor In Chief and the simpleton who wrote this sham and retract this article from the website.
People get attracted towards negative things easily and a negative thing gets more TRP rather than a positive thing. This is the reason we have all those Vamp characters in our daily soap. You must check your facts before posting anything. We Indians are going through this adversity and you are just trying to get cheap limelight!!
SHAME ON YOU MAN!!
(P.S.- It’s not about writing correct or incorrect English. It’s about expressing your thoughts.)
If there’s any decency left in this stupid journalism website, take this article down. And put something that encourages people to stay at home rather than provoking them against it. Can’t beleive it!
I think you have already got what’s yoo’r article is
Its totally lit
#printagenda
This is content you guys give. Shameless people
BLOCK THIS SITE ASAP.  THE INFORMATION ON THIS SITE IS COMPLETELY WRONG. JUST FOLLOW MODI 21 DAYS LOCKDOWN. AFTER 21DAYS YOU GONNA SEE A DIFFERENT WORLD AND THIS ARTICLE GONNA LONG GONE. THE PRINT THINKS RHAT THEY CAN RULE US BY CREATING A SHADOW OF FEAR OR PANIC. WELL IT NOT GONNA WORK THIS TIME BECAUSE THIS DISEASE CAN’T PENETRATE INDIA’S ECONOMY.
Thank you for such an article! I know you’ll be recieving a lot of hate for it but there a lot of people who hate the truth and can’t handle it. So thank you for understanding us citizens and trying to spread the severity of the matter to a country whose people are blind.
Dear Shivam Vij, stop running propogandas in here! We don’t need more psuedo intellects to brainwash people! Is this your best skill? To lash out & create hatred among people?
This article has very poor content with little regard for situational awareness and is honestly downright stupid. Get your facts straight, sir. Unpopular as they may be, the decisions taken by Prime Minister Modi were required for our people, period.
This author seems to be brain dead. Shoddy analysis and parochial viewpoint. Infact there is no analysis at all. Wasted my time reading this non sense
pSuch negative soul, Shivam Vij. How could one be so insensitive and write such article. Pity on you.
I don’t think i need to write much. You don’t even have that much brain to understand.
The writer seems to be unaware of the condition of its own country. The focus was on criticizing the PM and it seemed quite personal. It was a foolish idea to test a population of 1.3 billion. Even if they were to test 1 lakh people in a day, which is close to impossible, it will take 13000 days to do that.
There is not a curfew, the govt has allowed sale of essential items: grocery, medicine, dairy etc, so people need not panic. You actually are no different than people who rushed to shops to get supplies thinking it is the last day to get anything.
Lockdown is the only solution. India has only 30000 ventilators in working condition. During these 21 days, the affected will start to show symptoms and will go to hospitals. The unaffected will stay at home safely. No mass spread, no more casualties. Even the WHO appreciated India’s efforts towards stopping the spread but the writer was determined to give a bad name to its own country only to get a few likes from haters. Mindless criticism is not journalism
Print! Oh you have let us down! No fan of the govt but this is the best thing to do in this situation. What a stupid article is this?
Author of the article is lucky, that he is in India or Indian. Had he been in China, he would have put in Jail to serve life imprisonment. My request to Auther : Please don’t misguide the people of India. They want to live long and the Order of Respected Modi of Lockdown can only save the them. Economy can take back seat in such a trying time. It is the Country of  Rana Pratap, Ghandhi , people wil not let the people die, they all will share the resources.
Please don’t spread news which will demoralise the people of India.
Shame Shame
Had
.
I applaud your aspiration to set the bar at not being like China. Like in British times, people coming out to share resources or deliver essential services, unfortunately,  are being beaten up by lathis before they can even explain why they are out.  Trying reading the twitter accounts of the delivery services.
Right bro sach hamesha kadva hota he
for stupid bhakts😡.
Do you even sense when there’s propaganda?….when you hate them everything they do is wrong. If not for lock down half of Shaheen bagh would have coronavirus by end of march
जाके किसी कोरोना पॉजिटिव कि देखभाल करो ।
Every where State govt are trying their best to reach out to migrants.
Of course confusion did prevail but only initially. Now slowly things are falling into place. This is not the time to tear each other to pieces with vitriolic pieces ..the virus does not distinguish between anyone. Whether you like the present govt or not just follow protocols for your good. If you want to spit venom call your friends and do that. As far as Print is concerned this article is a big blot on your attitude to responsible journalism
This blog need to be blocked
The author is a fool…you come out and work
Whoever has written this article should be asked wt* he would do if he was PM ??
Boost economy ??? Such a brainless goon.
Hey Shivam Vij, I thought contributing editors research thoroughly before publishing but you didn’t. You cited Germany and turkey right. Well FYI Germany has more than 30k and turkey has approx 2300 cases. I just want to understand what we’re the parameters that made you compare or you don’t know basic math. You are an idiot journalist dude.
There is no alternate solution? Wasted such a catchy Title for such an amateur article. The Print is losing its charm and credibility.
All this comments. What’s new? Nothing, nothing at all. So stop commenting and focus on the economy. Do you guys even know what is going on? Hel _ ya’ ofcourse you know the situation, you are reading it every single-second about this virus on the news! But do you really know what we are really suffering from? Hel _nooooooo.
So instead of reading or watching the news every single minutes/hours or days. Think out of the box, think, think and keep thinking without blowing your brain off; because you never know what’s to come.
What the hell is going on this world, lord find us a way. Because this people know only how to write a fantastic comments like they know everything. Everything in the sense everything that is happening in this sinful world.
What’s is going to come is far worse than what is happening right now. “It’s a rapture”
Forgive this sinner’s.
Speak what is right, see what we had done, and (repent).
Nor do I agree nor I ignore about this article. But what I do know is we are falling apart like a wreaking ship in the ocean, that cannot be rebuilt on its surface. It’s never to late to escape from the life saving boat but will it hold everyone on the ship? You can’t say who knows, because you never knows. That is my question&answer to this questions! The rest is yours to decide.
No effected countries are going to perform economically well after such crisis. And to be good enough economically in near future we will need human resources and for that we have to save them. And for vaccine and all everyone is trying hard, it’s not the government’s fault that vaccine hasn’t been discovered yet. And yes if you feel short of groceries and essentials then complain about the execution. And yes if you really want to see the preparedness get affected ones you will get to see what the govt.  has done. For people like you it’s very easy to say we are not having internet facilities, we have been chained in our houses without analysing the seriousness of situation. And for your kind information on Tuesday there were 99 new cases and on Wednesday it was 64 …the difference we made with curfew and maintaining social distance. So please analyse all the background stories first and then come to a neutral conclusion without any biasness. #Not  a bhakt and modi fan
I too want to believe that Twitter accounts of people in quarantine and pics of facilities they are in, are all fake. So please help me with your account of how the government handled your case. You seem to also have inside information on the number of cases in India that even WHO hasn’t got it hands-on yet.  Please share. Humanity needs you.
Is it that easy to become a journalist like you(biased)🤨🤨🤨
Do you have any other idea or strategy to stop this disaster ????. Primer minister narendra modi is doing perfect right job.
Country like India which has a huge popular can’t able to control the Spread of Covid-19 with a lockdown. ,,,
And the country your are taking about have very less population as compared to india and still they are suffering a lot due lack of decision and and awareness.. They have only lockdown a few infected Area or cities that’s why they so affected countries and 100’s of people are dying there daily.. Inspite of have best treatment technology in thw world.
So please do not spread the confusion in the environment. You also stay at home.. @shivamvij … And your talking about economy so for your kind information not only indian but whole world economy is struggling… And if you want to safe economy then please donate some money to govt to save your country .
Horrible and unjustified article.
The Print, The Quint, The Wire
The biggest anti nationalist venom spilling  media.. Whoever operates them are the biggest hypocrites and only emphasize on one sided, biased journalism. How fo you even sleep peacefully having this much hateful thoughts. Even god can’t help you..
LET THESE SNAKES KEEP SPILLING THE POISON
, NOBODY PAYS HEED TO THEM.
Let us see rich media houses step up for a change and help the country and the Govt.The media was asking for lockdown.India has responded asper situation.The govt will work out some package for daily wagers  without your superintendence. As public many of us are ready to contribute 5 to 10K in PMs relief fund.What are you media guys doing just propagating a pre engineered propaganda to defame Modi and BJP.
Why don’t you media houses donate or fo something to help the country rather than fight those fighting the virus on your keyboard.The media instead of being keyboard warriors should step up being citizens of this country as well.
Yes, I am waiting for your Diarhea Mouth piece of Congress. You, sick people have started playing politics.
 Luckily, we don’t have you in power in this situation. Thank God.
Brilliantly written piece of work. It’s a pity that most can’t get past the first few lines and understand the message here. Yes a lockdown may be important but its method of implementation is crucial. People suffer enough. There is no reason to cause panic when you setup a lockdown like this. Yes the people should have been given time to prepare for this. Grocery chains should have been in the loop so supplies are not affected as they are right now.
Information should have been sent out clearly so one knows when one can do the essential grocery runs that one has to. It’s all about the communication.
This is not the only gross error the government has made. Essential medical equipment has been exported rather than stocked up in India and made available to doctors. Now was that a smart thing to do when we knew the disease was spreading so quickly? It takes the government over a week after the WHO declares the disease a pandemic before it starts to move? Complacency.
And in all of this the average day worker is stuck at home without any clear solution to his most pressing demand – money for food. Yes we can say better he go hungry than spread the disease. But to the illiterate and dare i say even the literate it’s often a what-I-can’t-see-can’t-hurt-me-attitude leading them to try to step out to earn enough to eat. Blame them? No it’s up to the people we elect to think of this. And think it through. That’s why we elect them.
It’s not just the poor. It’s the middle class too that are heavily affected. It’s all well and good to say stay at home and don’t go to work. Companies are crumbling. If this goes on who pays salaries?
This is not a rant against the government but a plea that they think things through in this distressing time. We don’t need the added burden of a badly structured plan over and above the already worsening situation.
Dear author ,i am not a modi fan  but i m a human being who know that well This situation is so critical. Just imagine ur self in his place .we all are sitting in our houses n thinking of our families and about our near n dears but he is thinking about whole nation .if this pandemic spread here like china or itly then people like u will blame him for not doing anything about it.just tell us will u take the responsibility if this pandemic spread herejust because u dont want this curfew.as a citizen of india i am very happy with his decision n proud of him
This article is result of poor study about the policies and runned by librandu propaganda to point on Modiji, you continue your dirty level but only Hardliners will understand the situation 🌹Get well soon with some patriotism🇮🇳
कितनी भी कोशिश कर लो तुमने जेसे गधे कभी यह नहीं समझ पाएंगे जो सरकार के साथ नहीं वह देश के साथ नहीं, आखिर पप्पू 🐷की चाटना छोड़ देंगे तो रोजी रोटी कैसे चलेगी 🤣🤣🐷
Most idiotic article ever. Wonder how do these media survive on…….total rubbish……..the only thing that there guys know is write anything for trp
No comments to Miss Manisha Mondal and her report. She is a new kid on the block trying to showcase her writing skills. She has just compared India which has a population of 130crore people to Singapore. Tomorrow, she will compare India with UAE.
If a nation wide lockdown wasn’t done, we would have seen cases like USA by now. Today’s count in USA is 64798. 198 people dead today alone. 909 deaths in all. Here in India, we have seen 12 deaths.
Question to her and ThePrint is, please give Mr Modi a valuable suggestion and we will counter you. This is a National Disaster. It has affected everyone alike.
You guys continue to support the opposition and you will stand in no man’s land.
So much hatred in this article..Whoever the writer is just creating panic by posting such irresponsible articles..I mean humanity & consideration is really rare and hatred is freely available…I m not a bhakt but considering the fact that WHO praises the efforts of India. people like this writer deserves nothing but a ban from writing.! Big slap on your face for such a pathetic article.
he is just doing his best to save our people and country. Best example is Italy, they took time for execution
this person has only and only criticised each and every thing
hes comparing india to such greatly developed countries
doesnt he knw india is the 2nd most populous country in the world. Given the population and density of popultion in india
its IMPOSSIBLE to test everyone. He sys about acquiring ventilators and nation wide testing, how many has Italy been able to get?u cannot test everyone and even testing wont do anything as symptions show after 10-14 days . If its not put in curfew they will spread to much much more ppl.
ofc ppl who are not showing symptions but have virus will spread to their family but spreading can be reduced .
The article is a signal. The intent is the issue. The people who fund this and the ones who think they can fire from this idiot’s shoulder will pay. One day. When this is over. Stay home, stay safe.
Idiot author
To all idiots. 1st be alive and then talk about what next. Just because you have to writer your writing all that you all feel. If possible author or ppl who are worried abt economy and things get to road and ask virus to come after our generation is gone. Idiots u r talkin abt taking precautions when things were happening in China is it ? Fools what is being told to be followed is a step to prevent. No matter your I Kashmir or Kanyakumari stfu n follow the rules.
PDS in most states give 1 kg rice for 1 rupee what else do u want for Survival  ? Free pizzzaa to all the BPL families in this situation. Do not worry there are enough schemes in this country for the poor and importantly the LOCKDOWN BENIFITS THE POOR AND THE MIDDLE CLASS   WHO OTHER WISE WILL SUFFER THE MOST.
Certainly, Waste of time and your energy.
Your classic example how to bias
The writer of this article is stupid, till vaccine is available our best chance is lockdown.. These are the people who always complain..  I’m sorry but Print doesn’t have decent writers who actually analyse the situation in meaningful way.. According to them WHO and UN who compliment Modi Government efforts are wrong and these Print noobs who get miserable pay know better.. Seriously stop writing..
Very true !!!
Have you ever done research before coming up such idotic conclusion ??
WHO stated that the best way to save people is to maintain social distance.
Not sure if have found a  new WHO.?  The one I know is crying out loud for more testing and calling lockdowns futile otherwise.
What a fool is this author comparing a poor country with population of 130 crores with Singapore and turkey.even Europe has said that staying home is only way to contain this disease and this author is suggesting to test and let people die.Thinking about economy in times of pandemics.The Print remove this toxic article before it poisons Indians mind.
Yes…. this author imposes poison into people’s mind
Nowhere does he do that. The author says that the 21 day window of lockdown/ curfew period should be used to Marshall testing equipment and medical resources as the virus is here to stay and will not vanish.
The three methods enumerated by WHO are
Test, Test,Test.
I for one fully agree with the author.
Not really this poor nation prioritized to spend 210.000 crores in 3 years on military equipment imports with $16 on medical per capita compared to Switzerland with 6500$/capita or UK with 3500 and US with 4000+. Rest apply your head. Since 2014 hes been spending time on mandir, muslim, world travel, buying military equipment. If he cares for lives of Indians.. action speaks louder.
Are you in Europe?  Are they testing only 9 per million citizens or beating their citizens up with lathis as well?
इस तरह के कष्टप्रद समय में अपना एजेंडा न चलाएं। मुझसे पैसे ले लो लेकिन नफरत मत फैलाओ। यह एक सही निर्णय है।
don’t run your agenda in such troublesome times. take money from me but don’t spread hate. it is a correct decision.
Stupid article.. anti india article to be precise
THIS ARTICLE IS WRITTEN BY POOR MENTALITY PERSON , HE DOESNT SEEM TO HAVE ANY KNOWLEDGE ABOUT THE JUDGEMENTS THAT COULD AFFECT OUR COUNTRY SERIOUSLY , BY DOING THIS VIRUS WILL NOT SPREAD AND ACCORDING TO WHO VIRUS WILL GET KILLED IN AIR WITHIN 8 HOURS BUT DUE TO FOOLISH PEOPLE LIKE YOU OUR COUNTRY IS FACING THIS CHALLENGE, NONSENSE WRITING THIS BLOG FOR JUST MAKING MONEY, YOU CAN FOOL OTHERS BUT NOT INDIANS . YOU FOOL .
I guess India and the world needs more scholars like you who can invent their own theories and back them up with random name dropping (WHO!?).
Coronaviruses last only a few seconds in the air. These are not airborne viruses.
We r ashamed of quality of our writers. It seems writers just post articles just for  shit they r paid.
Worst writing…Sick author. Remove him or her from your company
Absolutely
Absolutely !
Economy matters more than life
 Imagine one of your family member dies then what will you look economy of country ?
Lack of research is one of reason why many people like you are unemployed
Very well said, thank you
How mad u are….Worst writing…Sick author. Remove him or her from your company..
Worest fellow junk article.
Pathetic article right from the heading. Didn’t feel like reading the whole of it. I wonder why such articles are published when people could do with something meaningful to read, instead of hatred being spread for no reason. I am not at all a Modi fan, but if u had even done some research for your self, you would have seen that even opposition members who find the smallest reasons to criticize have praised his decision. Yes economy will definitely be hit, the same has happened all across the world. Measures are being arranged to ensure that the poor do not starve. But how on earth can you compare the most densely populated country on Earth with people of all kinds of social and economic backgrounds with countries having infrastructure like Germany, China etc etc. What brilliant move would you have taken? Locked down Maharashtra and Kerala ( people are still happily defying orders there) and let the rest of the country take care of the economy and ensure that the virus spreads to the villages and wipe them out? You know  our medical infrastructure, you know their limitations… you also know that so called developed countries with all their medical kits are also falling behind. Yes,more tests are necessary and some decisions have been taken late… We don’t care whether the move is political or not, but they had the guts to take a decision of putting life over economy. Not everyone can take such decisions…. You are most welcome to have your opinion, but I wonder why the Print enjoys publishing such prejudiced articles at this hour of emergency. Is this the only way you guys want to gain popularity?
Such a badly written article.. How will the economy survive.. If the whole country gets busy in controlling the spread of virus later on.
It is better to prevent then later reach a stage worst then this.
Worest fellow
Hope you are paid as promised by the liberals for this shit. At least by scolding modi you are able to win your bread and butter.. So be thankful to him.. Else no sane mind you will recruit you!!
2rupees editor spotted , you are not going anywhere in life, firstly you were bullied in school and now in society , just ignore him 🤞
I will never read any post when i’ll see your name.
A true Indian, no proof
Non sense editor, I think funded by Congress, in this situaton congress has forwarded helping hand but the editor is must be a Pakistani
Dear writer, please go back to school and read the story which implies the conclusion “Everyone cannot be made happy”
Stop publishing such articles when you yourself don’t know anything on a national level
Very easy to write on a computer and upload it. If u have the will, please get into politics and we’ll see how you run the country with 1.3 billion people.
True
As per the article by Shivan Vij, its better that people die due to the virus but its worth saving the economy run by the very same people we risk to lose to death?
You are in a democracy which is being run by the perople for the people. Isnt this obvious sense that life of a person is before money or have been blinded by the money like you have been blinded by the hate towards Modi Govt?
But this has become the norm in the past few years that it does not matter who speaks the truth but who said it right.
After seeing the coments I think the writer understands the value of his article I mean the shit.
The need of the hour is social distancing only. Do not spread wrong information…
We can make up our economy only if we survive with our dear ones
If such people are getting jobs of writer, it speaks volumes about the un-employed population. They  would have to be even more stupid than the writer to fail at getting a job. I am sure this person is very inexperienced. 
Yes india needs testing but what the writer made the whole article about is utter BS.
This isn’t journalism, this reminds me of how my ex girlfriend used to bitch about things in high school.
😂😂 Too Good
Dear Author I think you are a mentally sick person. You definitely need a psychiatrist.
Your journalist is not well read and well informed.
Please replace him
Please mend your opinion. Totally biased and kabootar-billi wala type article. Very bad decision of the print for condoning this article
The first and the most important thing was to make people understand the gravity of the situation.
The address was made at a time when the maximum coverage to the maximum number of audience/citizens was possible, unlike the writer so casually calls prime timing of the announcement.
It is important to stop the mass gatherings that was prevalent since the past week. I suppose the writer would prefer helpless scenario of innumerable deaths instead of a proper lockdown.
And no one is saying that the virus is going to disappear within 3 weeks. But some proper research, heck just Google search incubation period and epidemic control would prevent such melodramatic and biased propaganda, which the writer once again so casually accuses Modiji of.
And the facts mentioned here, which there are none, stinks of pure fear mongering.
And kindly ask for facts from proper sources about what is being done for testing, quarantine, transport, as has been patiently addressed by the respected PM in the address, which is again, so casually passed off as theatrics and dramatisation by the writer.
P..s.  I refuse to acknowledge such a person as a journalist, who do proper research with facts and references, before posting an article. This is just jumping on the bandwagon, with the clear intention of click- baiting. Hang your head in shame. It is people like you who rather than spreading the message argues against the logic.
India definitely needs to do testing testing testing and more testing.
Before all incoming international flights were banned, thousands of people were allowed into the country by simply checking their temperature.
Since most people develop mild or no symptoms, but are still capable of transmitting the virus, there’s absolutely no hope of stopping coronavirus till the time all incoming passengers who have arrived since February and their contacts are tested.
That means we need to test millions of people. However, more than 90% of test kits in India are lying unused.
Why are we just keeping them on the shelf?
The one and only thing that can save Modi ji’s government is to start mass testing and hope to complete it before the lock down ends. 
If Modi ji fails to get this done, 1.3 billion people will all go out of their homes as soon as the lock down ends.
When that happens, India could probably have 10 million+ cases within 14 days.
Is there the any chance that we can survive that?
India is a ticking nuclear bomb right now. We need to defuse it with mass testing. It’s the only thing that can save us all.
Before criticism u should know the facts of swine flu. India can’t afford this virus to spread to masses, Because of many things we can only contain this. I hope u personally don’t like modi, its ur choice but don’t question his integrity.
One day u will realize that u n ur family is alive because of this bold move
Totally prejudiced post and anti-India campaign! Sadly shows lack of research and just an effort to grab attention.
I thought the article was incoherent in its narrative. And then I read this comment.
Sad don’t publish don’t dumb articles please
Shivam vij, why are yu waisting time by criticizing govt. Does yu have any other idea to overcome cividh 19. Just go to govt and save the world.  If life’s saved. Economy and rest thing will back again.  Why are yu underestimating the powers of indian youth and it’s glorious strength. 
Jai hind……..
Shivam vij, why are yu waisting time by criticizing govt. Does yu have any other idea to overcome vividh 19. Just go to govt and save the world.  If life’s saved. Economy and rest thing will back again.  Why are yu underestimating the powers of indian youth and it’s glorious strength. 
Jai hind.
Idiot journo. If other countries initiate lockdown, you ppl appreciate them. If Modi initiates lockdown, you find fault with that too. It’s because of COVIDIOTS like you and proven history of shoddy manners of most Indians, Modiji has taken a right decision. The virus has started to spread and we should prevent it before stage 3 takes over. Modiji has done that and you fake liberal-ppl are losing your minds. As for the poor, for eg, in Bengaluru, they are provided free meals in Indira Canteens. I think you missed out on all such incidents that is happening in the country. First learn to support the Central govt in such stressful issues. The economy will slide down but the lives of each and every person is important right now.
Leave  about economy ,first think.about your life..We are not ready to loose a single Indian life rather ready to struggle with hunger for some more time..Please do not forget that we Indians are  born fighters …
Of course we will win today n ensure our ecoNomy will definitely grow  sooner..
Please stop posting this kind of articles n discourage others…. 
#Jai Hind!
What is your idea to handle situation genius?
The first and the most important thing was to make people understand the gravity of the situation.
The address was made at a time when the maximum coverage to the maximum number of audience/citizens was possible, unlike the writer so casually calls prime timing of the announcement.
It is important to stop the mass gatherings that was prevalent since the past week. I suppose the writer would prefer helpless scenario of innumerable deaths instead of a proper lockdown.
And no one is saying that the virus is going to disappear within 3 weeks. But some proper research, heck just Google search incubation period and epidemic control would prevent such melodramatic and biased propaganda, which the writer once again so casually accuses Modiji of.
And the facts mentioned here, which there are none, stinks of pure fear mongering.
And kindly ask for facts from proper sources about what is being done for testing, quarantine, transport, as has been patiently addressed by the respected PM in the address, which is again, so casually passed off as theatrics and dramatisation by the writer. If the virus doesn’t kill you, such articles will.
P..s.  I refuse to acknowledge such a person as a journalist, who do proper research with facts and references, before posting an article. This is just jumping on the bandwagon, with the clear intention of click- baiting. Hang your head in shame. It is people like you who rather than spreading the message argues against the logic.
badly written  article, with no supportive facts.
Pretty cheap…You are taking cheap shots in this situation.. Specially when you are ignorant about so many facts. The situation what India and other countries are facing now is unprecedented.. It’s impossible to find an overall solution when the virus is spreading like a wildfire. Why can’t you read what’s going on in other countries. Do you even know the population of countries where they have tested asymptomatic cases and do you even know our population?  Do you think it’s that easy to find a way to to Test Test Test? If it was that easy would countries like Italy and for that matter US be allowing for the people to die. How can you be prepared for such a situation..? I’m sure someone like you would be incapable of managing a single case even if it happens in your family and you are pointing out measures being taken for the safety of 1.3 billion ppl.. Economy is getting impacted not just India’s, it’s impacting the whole world’s.  Pretty lame. If you are getting bored sitting at home watch some series or clean your home, instead of bullshitting.
I think author is an anti-modi
No doubt, even the print does not want to take responsibility for such a biased set of reporting. First thing you have to understand is you are dealing with an indisciplined people. You cannot compare us with Singapore which is highly disciplined.  China is an total authoritarian country. In china, you would not have been able to complete this story. Your heart, kidneys, liver, eyes, kidneys & skin would be in some 10 different people.  Would you rather be in Italy, where you would be attending funerals of your relatives on a daily basis.
We are all going thru a tough time & this will continue. You are right,it will take years to get back on track. The first day of the junta curfew was great,  a success.  2nd was like a party.  We do not know how many people got infected on that day.  Yes, we need strong arm tactics, we need strictness, we are just not disciplined & idots like you dont help.
I really wish your parents had not met on that one day that you were conceived. Any other day would have made a tremendous difference.
U moron. I’m myself a surgeon, have worked for years in govt setup and now in private.India is a sitting duck if such situation like Italy arises..will be difficult to even count bodies let alone treat ppl..do some basic research, listen to what experts are speaking before shitting it out publicly. Problem is u just know to speak, give solutions we all know what problems are .. yes ppl might die of starvation, with coordinated effort by all state govts we can reduce ppl starving..but if this situation goes out of hand we are looking at atleast million casualties..stop shitting it out and stay in Ur home.. such a waste of time reading u ppl..such a shame on ppl like u
Please leave your job and rest at home. Don’t try to spread panic if you can’t help.
We don’t have unlimited doctors and nurses who will treat patients like god on the cost of their lives. In the lockdown days , there is high possibilities that people can safeguard themselves (but only those who are rational thinkers but not the racist like you) and those who already infected can get treated. What if no. of cases increases like this, who will be there to save us ..NO ONE
Better to care for yourself rather than criticise the government. You are the prime minister , the government for yourself in terms of your healthcare .. why depending on anybody . The person only knows to blame others are the foolish kind of people. So stop making this nonsense, do support and self isolate . Economy , employment everythng will again uplift. It is the time to give priority to health only .
Article author is absolute idiot and biased
You r absolutely right my kudos to your comments
Not sure…. Lockdown is necessary, but indian government may not have adequate resources, mainly food and medicine, to cope this situation. If not by virus, a large people may die by stervatsta. Lockdown may extend upto 6 month.
First look at which country you are talking about. Here people do not understand to follow the rules, when asked to maintain one small thing called social distancing, they could not follow. Then how do you expect the virus to be under control in a country like this without a lockdown. Please do not forget our country’s population density and the fact that we are a developing country when comparing to other countries.
I agree that Economy is weak , 21 days will put us in toughest situation to come back may be 1 or 2 years. But for densely populated country this is a good if not crores of people will be affected by Corona. I would appreciate if modi invests in indegenious research on Corona and  obviously testing should be massified.
Why u always find negativity….R u having any better solution in this scenario. As india is not having strong Medical Infrastructure so why test it. Financial let down may be overcome but Mass infections by virus is not bearable by India. And no lathis on the public just do your research properly to put facts in front of public.
I guess the writer is unaware of the fallout and infestation of Coronavirus in the countries he has mentioned like China – where it originated. The lockdown is a much appreciated step and an equally good measure taken by the Indian Govt. as the cases have been reported from across India unlike China where it was restricted to Hubei province and especially in Wuhan, the epicenter of the Pandemic. In India if people are allowed to roam freely, the cases would certainly go out of hand. As it is despite the Govt doing so much, you can see people still flouting norms and taking it lightly as in Italy. So kindly regroup your thought process and write something meaningful for the betterment.
I don’t think your opinion  even matters in-front of what experts has to say. When the health experts are saying that social distancing is the only way and how the hell you plan on achieving it in the second most populous country in the world. The PM has taken this decision by speaking to the experts and not to people like you who do not do any research and just assume. There should be people to lift the economy and just imagine the magnitude if anything  happens in India like its happening in Italy. Show some integrity towards your work and just don’t post your assumption , blogs are to be written after proper analysis of the topic. If this site just gives bloggers opinions then we have so many sources for it and I do not want to waste my time here reading your opinion as I believe in facts and figures. If you want to post your opinion then go to FB, there are so may people like you to give opinions.  #quittheprint
Which stupid wrote this headline and article i am sure you can’t plan your grocery for the month and judging modi’s plans cheap thinking holding pen doesn’t give better thinking ability you proved it which stupid is paying you for
Rubbish. Full of loop holes. For example If it takes months to vaccinate the country wouldn’t it take as long to test the heck out of everyone, even if we had a couple billion test kits? Do your math. India is unique and the problems of scale cannot be trivialized.
I don’t think your opinion  even matters in-front of what experts has to say. When the health experts are saying that social distancing is the only way and how the hell you plan on achieving it in the second most populous country in the world. The PM has taken this decision by speaking to the experts and not to people like you who do not do any research and just assume. There should be people to lift the economy and just imagine the magnitude if anything  happens in India like its happening in Italy. Show some integrity towards your work and just don’t post your assumption , blogs are to be written after proper analysis of the topic. If this site just gives bloggers opinions then we have so many sources for it and I do not want to waste my time here reading your opinion as I believe in facts and figures. If you want to post your opinion then go to FB, there are so may people like you to give opinions.  #quittheprint
I think author is the only person in this world, who can fight with corona. He should be recommended for noble peace award.
Guruji…welcome to bronze age…you guys analyze a lot missing all necessary action..it is nature call… slow down my friend… you cannot escape…
Please @print please send this writer to Italy please
Dear pls see the graph and numbers of usa spain itly currently infected people daily they r not much densed likes us and have far better than indian hostpital  .. ..  .
Ur some points is valid but Ecomomic cost of lives  is higher than anythings else… .  21 days lockdown and summer heat will save us from this pandemic
I don’t know why you guys even sleep at night with this negativity !!
Really shameful of The print for publishing these type of articles when the world is suffering from a pandemic . India is doing great till now in saving most of the people . Yes economy will effect but the world is suffering now from this. It will again rise but will further degrade if such fatalities are noticed here like italy and china.
The lack of research is reflected in this article. Words have great power, so use them wisely. Kindly state facts and not just hatred towards a leader who is doing the best he can under the given circumstances. Writing articles is nowhere close to running such a big country like India.
The lack of research is reflected in this article. Words have great power, so use them wisely. Kindly state facts and not just hatred towards a leader who is doing the best he can under the given circumstances. Writing articles is nowhere close to running such a big country like India.
This report is full of wrong and misleading details. Actually if you go by the internatonal  Records,  after the National Lockdown, India is doing much better than even the so called advanced European countries. This author is anti Modi which shows in his language.
Oh really!!! Going into facts:
When did we know about the virus ? December
When were we locked down? 3 days ago
What’s the point in locking us down when you aren’t gonna test each n everyone of us ? Increase in positive cases n spreading it to both family n neighbours
Besides the above facts, why hasn’t the Prime minister asked for each n every public representative, from as low as an elected ward member to the MP(don’t let go of the nominated suckers), to be present in respective wards, municipalities n constituencies ensuring people font wander for both essentials besides reaching their natives/homes ? No such announcement because yeah, we’ve elected them to serve them but not for them to serve us, haven’t we ? He has time to pester Kashmiri’s, have the Babri decision declared, be concerned for religiously persecuted foreigners n pass a bill in the Parliament but why hasn’t the same Prime minister not passed a bill to ensure each n every elected representatives, elected by and for the people manage both people n resources to ensure public safety ? 
What bill would you need more ? 
Locking down Kashmiri’s(hurting citizens) ?
CAA/NPR/NRC(that hurts citizens or claiming to be citizens of India) or
A bill that ensures elected n nominated  paid representatives doing their jobs(for the welfare of citizens)
Now, each of you decide if we really need such a PM or even any opposition leader for that matter who has no concern for people who have elected them ?
Yeah we need a pm who turns blind when kp in Kashmir were made helpless so that liberals have fun at people misery because of their religion and justify wrong .We need journalist who make criminals and terrorists bullies look like heroes and justify their violence in name of some stupid grievance .Kashmir getting what they deserve now they will know what it is to be made helpless now kps get to watch them suffer.Even Allah can’t save them.This muslims have fun at misery of kafirs in Islamic states right.They think their religion is invincible.It s fun to see when  their delusions  are  broken.Let them also get a taste of it.
This article has more modi bashing content than any article I have read till date.
Please be impartial
People should know what is the importance of a lock down please be a responsible journalist spreading the truth.
Lockdown should be taken seriously.
I wish for everybody ‘s  health and prosperity.
Essential services will continue.
Jai hind
Fyi: I am a leftist who disagrees with Modi at some points but this time he is right
And about the economy,it will like always recover and prosper
This article has more modi bashing content than any article I have read till date.
Please be impartial
People should know what is the importance of a lock down please be a responsible journalist spreading the truth.
Lockdown should be taken seriously.
I wish for everybody ‘s  health and prosperity.
Essential services will continue.
Jai hind
Fyi: I am a leftist who disagrees with Modi at some points but this time he is right
And about the economy,it will like always recover and prosper
I posted on twitter to prime minister president chief minister news channel that medicine r not available but no one reply nor any action is taken and the medicine is life saving drug
Bhakts gonna be Bhakts, we all who are commenting here have already piled the essentials for atleast 3 days or a week or some even for more than a month, we have smartphone, internet, laptops and  will spend the time and have good food, what about people who still don’t know about this VIRUS at all example a place 15km from Ranchi, what about people who earn Rs 50-Rs 100 a day and have family of atleast 5 how they gonna survive. PROBLEM IS WE AND BHAKTS THINK EVERYBODY IS LIKE US. There are celebrities who are saying we will save the economy later, listen CELEBRITIES if you stop earning this time your seven generations can live without earning. By the Way I’m a Kashmiri and we are used to it even worse than this. We still don’t have 4G internet to spend time with laptops and mobiles. In Kolkata I’m feeling like I’m in Kashmir now. FEEL THE PAIN OF KASHMIRIS INSIDE YOUR HOMES.
The society and government agencies should collectively support the daily wagers. The lifting of lockdown will cost us more
So according to u ..u should be set free and when the virus hit u …and  u already would have shared with so many people…..u will ask for treatment….
After that  u will blame the government also…u are such a retard and gone blind in Modi hate…that’s a reality
U are a idiot….end of discussion……ur view has very low vision…
Economy matters more than life. Imagine one of your family member dies then what will you look economy of country of your family ?
people like you  always spread hatred . Why Allah created you I dont understand
Please give solution before commenting, are you not aware of USA, Italy, Spain, Iran, Germany worst situation they facing, daily around 500 people died in Italy, over 5000 new persons positive in USA in a single day, do proper home work before commenting.
Check below link to get real facts :
https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/
This article just blames PM but not giving any solution in a right manner. This is worst stage of Journalism.
Please give solution before commenting, are you not aware of USA, Italy, Spain, Iran, Germany worst situation they facing, daily around 500 people died in Italy, over 5000 new persons positive in USA in a single day, do proper home work before commenting
This article just blames PM but not giving any solution in a right manner. This is worst stage of Journalism.
Specific to a region and defining your problem is not an Indian like me would do. You might not have seen people suffer in other states hence stating region specific statement. Stop this and think nationally and globally.  Request you to use your time wisely as these are disastrous times don’t waste spreading community war, thanks
People like u portray muslims in a bad light….n being a kashmiri it is expected from you to blindly blame modi even if he is taking all out efforts to save a billion population. But your agenda of hatred will never be successful just like your article 370. Jai hind
Sir are you from somewhere outside India.? Is Kashmir out of India.? Why did you leave Kashmir and come to Bengal.? Did u come on purpose.? People are dying here and your talking about something irrelevant. 4g doesn’t feed you or won’t keep you alive. Author will write tomorrow saying you are not a nation supporter if he gets paid so will you agree.? Have brain where at that place n not shit.
Brother, do you have a better solution? Yes, I know you hate Modi which is absolutely fine. But then tell me one thing, why the other state heads imposed the same lockdown before Centre had imposed it. In a nation like India, it’s absolutely impossible to provide free food to mainly daily workers who are heavily dependent on daily wages. Free food can be possible in Canada where there is less density of population & highly hygienic. In a country like India, there is no other option left apart from absolute lockdown because people over here are going outside just to see how the lockdown is going on…
You’re filled with hate. Take Care.
Saw the name … Understood the game 🙂
it is time mentally challenged people like Shivam Vij realize the seriousness of situation and not try to sabotage the effort of containing the spread of virus.
Very bad narration…
Money is man made , govt can print much. Even if you  put your dirty economics like inflation, rupee downgrade etc….
But Life of people are much more than business
Jesus christ. Are you a man or a poisonous snake? You are the kind of person who would be happy if all these calamities came to oass because they would help your personl vendetta against Modi. As a Journalist myself it sickens me to see The Print condoning and printing this absolutely lopsided and ridiculously posionous crap.
Well said Sir!
What people are focusing over is that editor doesn’t like modi?  Like what? Ask it to yourselves, can you undermine the questions put upfront? Fighting the disease is not everything but what after that? There are plenty of other measures taken outside alongwith lock down  but what we are emphasizing on is “lockdown”. Also I was in utter shock when I heard the national leader asked the citizens to clap and clang the utensils but failed to answer how the poor would survive these 21 days, considering India has two-thirds of its people living in poverty. Or is the lock down a more presentable and indirect way of saying “the time has come for the poor to die”. I presume, nobody wants to live after that. Sigh.
In many other countries where they r facing the same problem ppl r helping each other and giving food packets to poorer .. But In India ppl r waiting for PM to do …. Pls come out of this modi bashing and help the needy rather than speculating ….. There is a system which has to work the MPs,MLAs ,Corporators,ngos and citizens  , and all in the government departments it’s not a work of one person it’s everyone responsibility so come out of bashing one person and work towards helping needy ones
We expect such one sided biased articles only from the Print. The day you give a balanced article, I will change my name.
https://theprint.in/opinion/indias-perfectly-timed-lockdown-wartime-efforts-to-find-covid-19-cure/387552/
Please change your name to Caro Na Sharma
What bullshit is written in this article ..’.I hate modi ‘should be the heading of this article
When China was facing acute problems, why didn’t the govt do the lockdown earlier. Why wait till the last minute and run helter skelter.. Maybe the MP govt took more than estimated to fall… Hence the lockdown delay.
Do you enjoy holiday for election day in China??
The economy suffers but if this is at the cost of life of human being, with no vaccine upfront, the lockdown is a much better bet. Even if we would have prepared ourselves, beings out, getting infected and getting treated to be alive would have been a much costlier affair. Something even unaffordable by the top economies. This article is highly biased, don’t pass your judgement by this. Modi took 8 pm instead of day time to give you less time to be out at grocery store and reducing chances of getting infected. No government can be fool to committ a suicide.
Such a irresponsible article on a verge of a disaster!!
Very biased article.
are u from China or Pakistan that 21 days lockdown panicing u.who told to post such nonsense post..do u think if there were congress with now a time..just can’t imagine…
Foolish Post… National Lock down is a separate case approach that is highly required in India. Because if this Virus spreads, it will infects millions of people in India within few days. Now the most important question is: Does India have adequate healthcare facilities to treat millions of people at a time? The answer is ‘No’. If this National Lockdown have not been imposed in India, the cases would have been multiplied and Hundreds and Millions of People would have been in a critical situation. Thousands of people would have been dying in a day.
Salute to Modi for this quick decision to save our country! Proud of him!
Idiotic fool only if people there there is economy.Lives are important than economy.Those country’s where lockdown not performed are massevely affected by virus and 1000 are dying daily ex Italy. This is not the time to tell about economy and demonetisation get a life stay home idiot.
In these testing times, you need to be a responsible journalist and spread positivity . Even Britain has announced a 3 week lock down , you could see what is happening with the US. We definitely are following what china did to flatten the curve and we are following an example which has worked, now you are not an expert in corona virus/Disaster Management/ Management of Epidemic diseases , and article like these will lead to Chaos and negativity among people and people will start to defy govt order . Govt has taken theese decision on Advise of experts , its not like Modi has taken theese out of his own dreams.
I Follow your youtube channel and there is some good conent always by Sekhar Gupta , but the articles that you publish are always negaitve , you have the right to be a Modi Ctitic  , but in this time when the country is in a war like situation , you should see the PM as your commander and you are an soldier.
Journalists in today’s world portray themselves as super specialist and expert of every field. In real they are the most foolish and half mind person in the world.
This person is telling the gov to do……Testing testing…..and testing….
My simple question is that how many times you will test the same person ? Do we have that much billions of testing kits. ?
Its not the fact that if a person is once tested and it comes out to be negative then, there is no possibility that he will not contract the covid 19 again in near future.
Means suppose after 3 days of testing he contracts CoViD 19 then again we will have to do that test.
In this sense if you have maths knowledge then calculate how much testing kits and laboratory will be required. And how much out country with such a huge population have.
Sirf oppose karne k liye oppose na karo kisi ka ….thoda apne dimag ko use karo
The only ways is lockdown.
Singapore and korea are much smaller and doveloved nation with much lesser population so they are using this technique
It’s very easy to sit behind and write a long blog. You need a nerve of steel to take such decisions at top level . Nothing can be perfect . Please encourage the people to help each other in this time.
The decision he took was in hurry but if it was not  India could have become the next Italy or maybe worse. Everybody knows the condition of Indian public health services keeping that in mind whole country lockdown was the best bet against community transfer of the virus. Also China only blocked Hubei because that was the epicentre but India currently has no source so only block down of selected states is a foolish decision and European countries are far less densely populated than India so comparison to them is again a foolish decision .Lastly economy can only be lifted if there are people to lift it it comes later .  At least do some background search before spouting non-sense .
Very right
Author is absolute idiot and biased
There is no point in explaining it to him as he is a biased man and whatever Modi will do to save this nation he will criticise it. Why can’t you see the media house he works for?? 
If Modi wouldn’t have announced a complete lock down people like him would have still criticised Modi. So we trust our PM and believe what he is doing is right and we also know the mala-fide intentions of this writer. Don’t we ??
Shame on you man for promoting such content online, disgusting.
I disagree with the post with exception, testing. Lockdown is essential to stop the spread and along with extensive testing we can hope for ending the crisis. Of course, it has severe impact on the economy yet addressing the people’s insecurity is more important than economy or even freedom.
One fool wrote foolish article without any research and surprisingly he got some mullahs support too…
‘Idiot’ economy is just a math ….don’t write foolish shit…
Well Raju ji … Mullahs , aren’t we ….. Who think of what will happen to the daily wage earners who are now stuck at home without enough money or resources to last a week , let alone three … You seem to be clever man , the cleverest among us fools …. Do suggest how do the people who earn less than Rs 200 / day on a daily basis are to survive … Do reply : )
Do you think if they get affected by virus and their life is in danger, then who will support their family, a life time support will be gone from that family, in 21 days no one will die and what ever we have in our home try to tackle with it, so that we will not suffer due to virus which takes our life’s..
Well explained situation. It is one side of coin. Just think if this virus will enter in 3 stage and transmission will faster like italy, Spain. What will happen.
Hey Shivam Vij ,I agree with your views of high the sudden lockdown can threaten our already struggling economy .But , let us take a different view, 1.think about the doctors and nurses who are working continuously to save our citizens, so you want to burden by removing the lock down and allowing it to spread??
2.”money can’t buy everything” as our wise people say so this is a critical situation where you are supposed to think about the lives….Would you still be thinking of your career or work even when your close ones fall sick with corona??
3.police man as you say love to do Lati charge…That’s not always true ….They are trying to control people and making them realise the dangerous effects of corona. When verbal doesn’t work for people then physical is only left out.
4.Think about the people who still roam even after knowing the situation,they are supposed to be trolled instead of trolling others.Please think about this–◆one person can indirectly spread the virus to thousands of people because of their negligence…Please mend your opinion
The decision he took was in hurry but if it was not  India could have become the next Italy or maybe worse. Everybody knows the condition of Indian public health services keeping that in mind whole country lockdown was the best bet against community transfer of the virus. Also China only blocked Hubei because that was the epicentre but India currently has no source so only block down of selected states is a foolish decision and European countries are far less densely populated than India so comparison to them is again a foolish decision .Lastly economy can only be lifted if there are people to lift it it comes later .  At least do some background search before spouting non-sense .
I think u dont realise the fact that  before modiji s announcement yesterday already 30 states and union territories were under lockdown.  He hasnt taken any new decision.
Wait for the immanent  chaos.  Modi reminds me of Shah Reza Pahlavii of Iran. Grandiose ideas is all he has. Persopolis will collapse. There will be suffering. Logic, Math, Science and Commonsense does not grandstand.
Give this idiot writer some money and leave him for corona so that his economy is maintained, may carry his money after death
Idiot writer…Thank God you are not PM otherwise you have made India worst than Italy…Shame Shame…Write sensible… Google don’t shows these idiot type of article
All the same it’s true that we have goofed badly in our response and imported this problem.  Even now the planning is done from an ivory tower where the poor are supposed to have bank accounts and registrations for direct benefit transfers..
The problems are so huge that Im afraid the government will not have the patience to think through –  adapt  – and the result will be police brutalising the poor and the helpless. 
And I don’t have solutions. Shelter homes, food kitchens may be part  answer..but this causes close quarter environment. May be transport can be organised for people who have been screened so that they can go home..
Its impossible to be prepared for anything and everything, some are saying we are not prepared. Are US, UK, France and other countries prepared for this. Another example, people who are raising questions on preparedness, how much prepared are you, if you face accident situation? It’s easy to blame and since now there is not much work only option people choose is to comment.
Can you use the same time to prepare the country??
Thank you Mr. Editor of this article. Its that time where everyone acts responsibly and contribute our bit to handle the situation. Instead we have senseless jackasses who are talking about what happened few years back. If you don’t have anything to offer to help its a humble request. Please zip up and dont bother people who are making attempts to do their work and protect nation. 
Now remember JA editor of this article, efforts is required from everyone. If Modi just declares something, it won’t become success until everyone follows it.
Dear author, Why don’t you shut up and take rest than writing this kind of shit
Shame on you. Atleast your age and education should teach you some analyzing ability. This is the worst report I have ever seen past few months.
Foregt about reporting, You are not even fit to teach kindergarten.
To be life or economy ? That is the question !
Proud of U Print to raise Perfect Questions !!!
Testing, Testing, Testing.
Home Testing should be  Carry out.
This is Not About Rahul Gandhi or Modi.
This is ABout Indian Government, This is Avout Indian Public, Who Cares Who is Prime Minister, Is he Manmohan Singh or Mod… i dont think anything Changed in India…. People used to believe in Myths and they Are still believing in that
Home testing of 1.3b population?It’s so easy to comment but very difficult to execute in practical life lol
If people stay at home there will bery much less need of testing, testing, testing… but no still many are just Roaming around and chilling… So first study the case and then comment..
This article by Shivam Vij is spot on. It has raised number of pertinent issues – testing, preparedness, choosing the strategy of lockdown as opposed to more testing,  details of conducting and managing the lockdown itself, post lockdown strategy and potential economic devastation and ruin of livelihoods. Infact, so good is Shivam this time that every comment in opposition is only able pour ridicule on him without being able to refute even a single point of his. Kudos.
2 points I wish to make –
A. it is not Rahul Gandhi or Shivam Vij’s job to ensure that correct decisions are made to solve the country’s problem. The citizens of India have voted Mr Modi into office with a comfortable majority for precisely this. The buck stops with him.
B. The metric of success is not simply number of infections or low deaths. It is how soon can we recover from this, how soon will our economy get back on its feet and is there any coherent plan for achieving this. I am afraid that the track record of the present regime isn’t too encouraging on this front.
Wov. It not Rahul or Shivam job… well, how can it be their job. They only spew negativity and venom. Yes. It the job Modi to go to everyone home, yes every of 130 crore home and rest them for Corona virus, because he was voted for that purpose. The commenter, Shivam… no no… they dont have any responsibility. No. Indian citizens have no responsibility. They can party around, move around. It is only Modi’s responsibility. This attitude of Indians will kill India. Not Corona virus.
There are a plenty of other options which the world is trying out but our so called pm is into forcing and beating up people to restrain the virus. No community testing yet, he doesn’t THINK it to be important enough. Applause. No actual propaganda to combat the disease but if you know the Central has permitted “lathi-charge”. We are really going to get behind 21 yrs, no doubt and kudos to our pretentious leader.
Yes I agree that testing should be done but are we rich enough to afford that many testing kits when whole world is need of testing kits are we self sufficient to produce them inenough numbers or can we import them from south Korea competing with west with our rupee, we don’t have enough masks  and sanitisers  and u r talking about safety gear and massive testing , excus meWE ARE NOT CHINA WHO CAN BUILD A HOSPITAL IN 10DAYS OR USA WHOES DOLLARS CAN BUY OUR LIFES.  On Monday traffic on the road may  tell u indians need lathis to stay home
As for the rabi season farmer always always works alone not crowded. And lastly supply chain is intact it seems we are getting milk and vegetables and ration.
Such an idiotic writer, uneducated fellow. The print please eliminate this writer. He/she is a cruel thinking person
This is paid media…. We are way better than most of the so called developed nations and we will definitely win this and all readers please stay away from this Presstitute.
Writer is pappu’s lover.GOD bless u & Ur family also protect u fm corona.
It’s best to B L O C K any news and story from this #scumbag of earth, ‘ThePrint’, it prints only the P O O P or at best a ‘rudaali’ as if all the reporters/in-charges/editors attend #funeral each day….while WHO is praising our Modi for very nicely managing this menace which SPAIN, USA, ITALY etc. sort of rich and supposedly composed of ‘educated’ citizens, have come to this fate which will only go worse from here… We are effectively facing this crisis and may by God’s grace win over it….
This D I R T ‘ThePrint’ is feeling R O T T E N because Pakistan is going into a severe crisis without India getting into the same…
However, remember…If you write ‘FRAGRANCE’ with urine, it will verily give nothing but only stench…..however if you write ‘STENCH’ with rose-water, it will give no doubt fragrance!
May this B L O T on PrintMedia called ‘ThePrint’ learn from it!
Bhakts be like “the PRINT is poop but I better taste the poop before I write some hateful comments”. LOL #tattiheaded
Completely agreed with the lockdown idea of our PM since maintaining social distance is only vaccine right now to deal with this pandemic but our government should have done it earlier when it was in stage 1 as well as shutting down airport for international flights earlier should have gave us some relief
Worried about workers on daily wages and weekly wages how would they manage their needs. Our government must work on it seriously so that the poor working class people can manage themselves
Whole world know except this lunatic that till a medicine or vaccine is invented the only way to prevent from this dreaded virus is lockdown.  We have seen that people are not following strictly the advice of doctors. The only way out is lockdown.
It’s best to block any news and story from this #scumbag of earth, ‘ThePrint’, it prints only the poop or at best a ‘rudaali’ as if all the reporters/in-charges/editors attend #funeral each day….while WHO is praising our Modi for very nicely managing this menace which SPAIN, USA, ITALY etc. sort of rich and supposedly composed of ‘educated’ citizens, have come to this fate which will only go worse from here… We are effectively facing this crisis and may by God’s grace win over it….
This dirt ‘ThePrint’ is feeling rotten because Pakistan is going into a severe crisis without India getting into the same…
However, remember…If you write ‘FRAGRANCE’ with urine, it will verily give nothing but only stench…..however if you write ‘STENCH’ with rose-water, it will give no doubt fragrance!
May this blot on PrintMedia called ‘ThePrint’ learn from it!
I will share you the internal stats from heath ministry. Its not 300 or 400 which are infected as reported by most news sources. The figure is in lakhs. India has population of over a billion. If there is no curfew it won’t take time for more than billion population to get infected.(.. continue)
Just felt like writing these after reading the comments.
How do some personal attain such divinity! Irrespective of history of actions and results, whatever they do become right in the eyes of people!
There’s a story in Ramayana where ram kills a shudra for praying to God (doing sanyas) and the shudra thanks him for killing saying you gave me moksh..
But Ram’s history of actions+results were great and you could shift some blame from that shudra for thinking so…
Could we not use common sense in these situations, than blindly believing, at least the educated and learned people who are reading this article?
Hey dear writer.I found your article written by some one 7 year old boy.have you seen a cigarette  box?After watching that people are still having it and this article is about  corona.you are talking about INDIANS.140 CR OF them.people need to stop crying about poor and richer concept now.testing capacity  wont help to stop.now in 21 days those only will come out who will feel sick and affected one.atlest they wont spread to others in 21days this is know as chain break.educate your self.
Very poorly written article. Doesnt even make sense. Hope some good sense prevail in the author. Having different opinion is okay, but judging each action only by the face of the person is wrong.
If u dont survive only what economy will u run dude
I would just say.. educate yourself and use your common sense which doesn’t seem to be anywhere as per your intellect depicted in your so called poorly written article on a grave and alarming situation .. god bless you.. writters and historians needs to be wise.. but it seems bunch of clown now a days have taken over..
Shame on you.
You call yourself a journalist !!!
Do you even have children, wife or parents. Or you have left them to die in some village whole you enjoy with whores …
The writer hates Modi. Not an unbiased journalist’s opinion. A useless read.
It’s an opinion which also offers thoughts on solution.However to put Modi down appears to b centre theme on pretext of Corona.
Very well explained.
What kind of idiot is this to put up such article
Oh what non sense crap…Most developed countries are in a very bad shape..Indians like you have a habit of criticizing our country..The results of the lockdown has not come yet…so.better not to.speak instead pray for the nation
.Indians have a habit of cribbing all the time..Nothing new..God why do we have such creatures in our country
Absolutely a shitty article. Absolutely prejudiced . There are no other alternatives than a lockdown to minimise this pandemic. Worry about  falling economy if your survival is guaranteed .  In this testing times also they are worried about the assessing the economy.
I will share you the internal stats from heath ministry. Its not 300 or 400 which are infected as reported by most news sources. The figure is in lakhs. India has population of over a billion. If there is no curfew it won’t take time for more than billion population to get infected. And remember if we go with the minimum mortality ratio that is 2 percent then too the deaths toll will reach 2 crore excluding the higher death toll in senior citizens and excluding that the remaining population is still infected. You may say the people may die of food. Almost every area has atleast 1 grocery shop open. (.. continue)
The lockdown was essential but addressing the needs of daily wage earners and keeping the supply chain of essential items are more crucial to keep the economy intact. People like him will always have everything at hand as long as they’re in office.
Please get your facts right before you write something like this and mislead the people. With this “curfew like lockdown” we can atleast reduce the number of people that will be affected. And its a proven fact that social distancing is the magic wand for this pandemic. Prevention is better than cure. I’m a doctor myself and I know for a fact that when the number of cases become too high we implement whats called a triage i.e we filter patients based on their rate of survival. If that happens many wont even be looked at. And about your testing testing testing….would it make you happy that we let everyone out on the streets doing what they wish to and then keep testing testing them so you get bigger and bigger number of affected and dead people so that we can surpass Italy and create a new record?. Is that what we are looking for? The primary priority is the health of the people and this curfew is the best way to it. And I totally am with police people…I respect them for risking it and standing out in the street thrashing people who think this a joke and picnic around.
Ps : Im not a supporter of any specific person…Im a supporter of any person who does the right thing at the right time
Please get your facts right before you write something like this and mislead the people. With this “curfew like lockdown” we can atleast reduce the number of people that will be affected. And its a proven fact that social distancing is the magic wand for this pandemic. Prevention is better than cure. I’m a doctor myself and I know for a fact that when the number of cases become too high we implement whats called a triage i.e we filter patients based on their rate of survival. If that happens many wont even be looked at. And about your testing testing testing….would it make you happy that we let everyone out on the streets doing what they wish to and then keep testing testing them so you get bigger and bigger number of affected and dead people so that we can surpass Italy and create a new record?. Is that what we are looking for? The primary priority is the health of the people and this curfew is the best way to it. And I totally am with police people…I respect them for risking it and standing out in the street thrashing people who think this a joke and picnic around.
Ps : Im not a supporter of any specific person…Im a supporter of any person who does the right thing at the right time
I don’t know how does a literate like Journalist is slamming govt. Policy. 0lease understand the need of hour and I do agree that there will a section which will be affected by this move, we need to look at a bigger picture if tomorrow the virus spreads then answer us are we in a situation to addrezs thousands of people waiting for treatment.
I strongly believe that this move will reduce and can give a strong chance of saving lakhs of people.
Stupid writer, doesn’t know how to react at the situation like this. Everyone knows that there will be a huge impact not on poor but middle and upper classes too. You saw what happened when only 58 districts were locked down, there were huge jams in Delhi and other cities, we Indians need to understand the meaning of lock down. If people would have stayed at home and followed the instructions, whole country would have never locked down. People are still not listening, we are not Italy or US where population per sq area is far lesser than india, if we reach stage 3, it will kill millions. If developed countries can’t control this, how do you think we can do it with people like you who would always come out and never follow orders. Understand the situation first and then write. Not sure how Print can publish such shit.
Stupid writer, doesn’t know how to react at the situation like this. Everyone knows that there will be a huge impact not on poor but middle and upper classes too. You saw what happened when only 58 districts were locked down, there were huge jams in Delhi and other cities, we Indians need to understand the meaning of lock down. If people would have stayed at home and followed the instructions, whole country would have never locked down. People are still not listening, we are not Italy or US where population per sq area is far lesser than india, if we reach stage 3, it will kill millions. If developed countries can’t control this, how do you think we can do it with people like you who would always come out and never follow orders. Understand the situation first and then write. Not sure how Print can publish such shit.
Sir, biggest problem with Indian is the single largest democracy, unlike China. You are able to write all these due to the transparency and freedom of press unlike any other country you referred to. WHO is also praising India’s actions towards this pandemic. 
Good that you are also looking at a negative side, hope such things will be slowly taken care of by the government and avoid further disasters.
All you get is negativity from ‘The Print’
Pessimistic view from the author. Do u have a better idea for the given situation. I would even accepted the lock down even if it was 2 weeks earlier
He has no idea except an instruction to oppose whatever modi is doing.if he tells to maintain personal hygiene this writer may stop bathing.
only a numb nut can write this… & post. No one has a solution. How easy it is for you to put the blame (im guessing motivated enuf) on the current PM. You age and ur small thinking (easily analyzed in ur article) is without substance to even acknowledge that this being an unprecendented event ever at the current scale past 50 years… does NOT have a vaccine and so stupidly u write pointing out deficiencies.  Everything is a scam for u. Every loose opportunity to throw a blame game… Free advice… evolve… and try ur hand at something else – you are not a journalist… becoz if u continue u wud devolve.
To author , I am not a great fan or a follower of modiji as a prime minister what he is saying we have to listen over and decide acceptable or not as per these issues related to covid 19 coronovirus is spreading over a lot it is uncontrollable self isolation is the only controllable way right now .economy matter related the same will be compared to demonitizaton rather relatively huge amounts money laundering from banks by corporates  it as got affected otherwise economy would not be compared to coronovirus of self isolation for 21 days
Are you an idiot 21 days for getting out those peoples who has covid-19 something batter than nothing look other countries we are batter than them just delete your damn post right now
What?  Have patience because here nothing like dreams/stories/magic. Rechecked your data and calculations. Our country have it’s own limitations. But it’s good that we are trying with our solutions. Do you have any magic/quick inhaling solutions  for this kindly suggest.
Hahaha…. The author must have been experiencing tough time sitting idle in home….Idle mind is devil’s workshop…
The entire Print team should be quarantined….
If a person supporting a person for just 5 to 6 years is called as a “Bhaktha” then what should a person be called who is supporting entire family since 60+ decades……
I will share you the internal stats from heath ministry. Its not 300 or 400 which are infected as reported by most news sources. The figure is in lakhs. India has population of over a billion. If there is no curfew it won’t take time for more than billion population to get infected. And remember if we go with the minimum mortality ratio that is 2 percent then too the deaths toll will reach 2 crore excluding the higher death toll in senior citizens and excluding that the remaining population is still infected. You may say the people may die of food. Almost every area has atleast 1 grocery shop open. Ration shops are already running at their lowest prices. If people are still not capable to buy themselves food then they should probably die. Because else everyone else will have to suffer which won’t be just. Health always comes first. HOPE THAT FOOLS NOW GET THE FULL PICTURE OF WHAT PM AND GOVERNMENT IS DOING BEFORE POSTING IDIOTIC THINGS.
Author is like a evil. No body will be agree with author’s views;
Your irresponsible thoughts should not spread… Hope you are aware of what pandemic disease is…
It was an Anti Modi report rather than anything about  Corona.
Mr if you know so much kindly upload yours ideas about what should be done today,
To PM and us too, wanna see how useful are yours ideas
You must not b just taking potshots about primetime, as when a leader addresses the nation ,it has to b at the primetime. Addressing at 8 am. Would have created more time to panic hence more panic.
U raise a few valid points though . Hope executive deals with it efficiently.
Needless to say the week n the poorest will pay the highest price for any calamity.
Why to give such writers even a platform??
Offcourse there will be economic damage, there will be immense hardship on all people specially on people who live on daily earnings.
But the cost of doing nothing is exponentially higher. In a country like ours, we could easily see 1-3 million infected.
Take a chill pill. Stay indoor, be safe.
Who voted him? The 39%?
Our friend here in the first paragraph itself lost touch from reality. Countries which went late into lockdown are suffering and are now realizing they should have gone earlier. Many countries have declared lockdown to contain the spread. South Africa, New Zealand, for examples, have decided to go on lockdown. Impact on economy can be reversed not the lives lost due to virus
Worst article, senseless and baseless
शर्म है कुछ ….बन गया लेखक
Who is the author of this article. Are you out of youe mind. What makes you think that everybody should be tested. This will create another situation in public gatherings. I think you should be tested first for your cheap thinking. Get well soon bro
Shit article, senseless and baseless
I think the analysis is very cheap. And done only for PUBLICITY STUNTS, people like u make deliberate fraud articles to disturb the minds… And finally u will judge in the view of politics only very very mean and bad. And please dont make improvements in this because u dont deserve that too. .😠😡😠😡😠😠 भाई जरा अच्छा देखो सोचो और लिखा करो सिर्फ मोदीजी की बुराई मत करो….
Please dont call me Bhakt after reding this.
This is ridiculous  article
Why are you always complaining and cribbing? Are you more knowledgeable than the WHO and the countless economists who recommended a national lockdown? I even suspect that you have any sort of Science background. That’s the problem of giving Arts students the right to comment on health and economic matters. Shameful
Hi bas..d
U have head but you don’t have brain
In 21 days we will know how many are infected
Afterwards we can do whatever depends on that situation
Some peoples right now have to face risk
But think about in large
Well said.. here reporter seems not happy with Modi..but he doesn’t understand our people are in danger and  lock down is must..while I agree that govt must ensure poor people are getting food and essential medical facilities.
The strategy here is to delay the spreading of coronavirus as much as possible , at least a month and then the summer heat will take over and keep the virus from spreading.
Harvard researchers have  preliminary findings that the virus thrives in dry, cold conditions and does poorly in hot, humid places. So India only needs to delay widespread infection situation till the summer heat kick in.
At least this strategy is better than doing nothing.
I wish there was a downvote button. I highly disregard this article. No Im not an Andhbhakt but this was the only option we had being the second most populous country. We all know what could happen if this virus reaches slums.
This is by far the best decision taken by the current government and I wholeheartedly support it.
So what extraordinary, so called THE PRINT, is doing to save our nation?
Modiji is doing what is right for the country at this time, and he has already assured that people of country will not be denied access to basic essential things necessary for their survival, so the point that people will die of starvation is totally irrelevant!
And to be true, just sitting, commenting and blaming a person is very easy but to take appropriate steps nd decision in the favour of world’s second largest populated country is very difficult and requires a lot of deep consideration.
What could YOU have done if you had be in the power???
India does not have the best health infrastructure and it can’t be built in a day or 2 or so. But, I m very sure the our honorable prime minister is deeply concerned about the situation of country nd trying his best to do the maximum for the country. So, testing may also get started very soon as it is already in progress in some cities of Rajasthan.
But sorry to say, u just have misused the right of expression in the democracy to show your hatred towards Modiji and nothing else.
No concerns for people you have in actual.
I think you must also be aware about how much our opposition leaders are incapable enough to handle this situation who are still bickering about Modiji’s actions to be slow nd late.
So please you don’t do be IDIOTIC be SYMPATHETIC!
Modiji is doing what is right for the country at this time, and he has already assured that people of country will not be denied access to basic essential things necessary for their survival, so the point that people will die of starvation is totally irrelevant!
And to be true, just sitting, commenting and blaming a person is very easy but to take appropriate steps nd decision in the favour of world’s second largest populated country is very difficult and requires a lot of deep consideration.
What could YOU have done if you had be in the power???
India does not have the best health infrastructure and it can’t be built in a day or 2 or so. But, I m very sure the our honorable prime minister is deeply concerned about the situation of country nd trying his best to do the maximum for the country. So, testing may also get started very soon as it is already in progress in some cities of Rajasthan.
But sorry to say, u just have misused the right of expression in the democracy to show your hatred towards Modiji and nothing else.
No concerns for people you have in actual.
I think you must also be aware about how much our opposition leaders are incapable enough to handle this situation who are still bickering about Modiji’s actions to be slow nd late.
So please you don’t do be IDIOTIC !
Aren’t there any other better writers at “ThePrint” ,is this all you got @”ThePrint”
So prejudiced. Now it seems no need to go through the article published by print. No matter what it will simply be Modi bashing. Don’t even provide a constructive criticism.
This stupid author must be sent to work in hospital amongst corona infected patients. This guy is probably sitting at home safe and pooping all over the media
Print has always been printing such posts, you guys are very vocal about it too.. countries which have done good job in containing it, even china? There are nearly 30k cases in germany and a lakh in china, italy we all know what is the case!! Economy will and already has taken a hit, but if its not contained then the situation will get disastrous which none of the latgest economies could handle. Curfew as you guys have stressed upon to use, well ofcourse india needs such unwelcome measures, idiots are running around carrying quarantine seals, what else could govt has done? And while comparing our nation to some developed ones , why don’t u people google population of our nation? For gods God’s sake its 1.3bn . Measures such as lockdown are the only thing that can break the chain.
He has written the article, as if, PM issued the lockdown instructions without taking his consent. How does he know that things have not been planned.? In our society , Govt. vans are supplying dry ration. Amul, mother dairy is working and even in the evening the supplies are available.
So there seems to be a  motive in spreading this negativity. He had fallen in love with Lahore. Maybe a paid recruit now? After all there are presstitutes  in every country.
Shooting in the air huh?2nd most populous country,we cannot afford testing so many people cheap testing kits are there but our population is huge, economic crises?well that’s with every affected country,the only thing he did not plan well is daily wage workers and some dumb workers who have still do not have aadhar cards
India’s one of the most densely populated countries. The risk is still there even with everybody sitting at home. But what about small businesses, middle class families that earn a lakh per annum. Should their savings tank the burden for 21 days? What after that? What if modiji decidws quarantine needs to be extended?
We can’t afford testing everyone? Then what can we afford? What other way do you have to ascertain the health of a person? 
Think of the long term instead of sitting content with the short term
Population : 1.35+ billion 
Single testing, double testing, triple testing, repetitive testing.
No lock-down and our behaviour.
There lies the basic logic.
Modi has a developed a fake dynamism among the  people and they are too much of idiots to see, that he is a monster in disguise. His thought and ideologies may be coming from something pure, but his implementations are idiotic no better than the chai seller he was. He just gets on with half assed implementation. Hurting the public more than helping them out. 
It’s not like the we Indians have any sense of public responsibility, but a leader like Modi doesn’t help much in us improving ourselves.
He is like Loki all show and fanfare. The public loves his performance, not to see what mess he creates in the background. 
His intensions however good it may be, he will never show what he is really is.
Are you insane . Dude the virus is so contagious it could take down a major population of the country. Hope you understand how that will affect our economy. Also about the execution, look what has happened to Italy with a slower locked down. We have infact taken the right decision.
The rest of the situation with food and economy crisis has to be taken care of separately by helping poor people migrate, giving food, which is the right direction we are taking.
Also these decisions may not have been Modi’s decisions, but advices of many educated and responsible citizens, also the national security advisors.
These decisions are not so simple as you think.
As with demonetization, there seems to be effusive enthusiasm for the lockdown among the urban newsreading classes. The logic for the lockdown is even stronger than demonetization. But in retrospect there is no denying that demonetization was a disaster that did not serve any national purpose. And that turned out to be the case because implementation was shoddy and the pitfalls were not thought through and hedged against. The burden was ultimately borne by the non-newsreading classes. Lockdown runs the exact same risks.
We get the dispensation we deserve and we are all so happy. Don’t come in the way of our happiness.
Social distancing with media will help you a lot. It will remove all negativities. Take a break. Life is more important than livelihood. Jaan hai tho jahaan hai. Instead sitting before TV for breaking news, instead reading all sundry articles spewing negativity, read books. Plenty of them available online. Cambridge and Amazon online library opened up even free reading rate materials. Or read articles from Harvard or McKinsey websites. Very interesting ones, you would never have imagined. They are all about daily life. Not everything about business. Stay home. Stay healthy.  You can get back your money, but not not your life if you miss it.
You mentioned Germany as of one the countries who have done better. Can you shed some light on that because last I checked, Germany has more than 33,000 cases.
Also, Brazil took it lightly when there cases under 100 there and now they have 2000+ cases.
The way I look at it, other than ‘lockdown’ there is no toher alternative. You worry about economy? What will you do with it if you don’t survive.
I don’t even want to get into technicals about the decision of lockdown cause it’s too much work to state the obvious.
You have made a couple of points which look sensible but they are very obvious. So nothing new there except that they shine like a star amidst the dark morbid statements.
Take a break and freshen up . You might feel better and I am sure it would reflect in your future articles.
Germany and Taiwan are less populated countries compared to india. Criticising others doean’t make you smart. We all know the problem so rather than pointing to it, find a solution. And if you dont have one then atleast stop spreafing negetivity around. Atlease govt. is doing something here.
Please notify me about writers background and his family members .as he is not worried about them. He must know ,few things are not to be discussed publically to avoid panic .Thanks & regards.
Modi has a developed a fake dynamism among the  people and they are too much of idiots to see, that he is a monster in disguise. His thought and ideologies may be coming from something pure, but his implementations are idiotic no better than the chai seller he was. He just gets on with half assed implementation. Hurting the public more than helping them out. 
It’s not like the we Indians have any sense of public responsibility, but a leader like Modi doesn’t help much in us improving ourselves.
He is like Loki all show and fanfare. The public loves his performance, not to see what mess he creates in the background. 
His intensions however good it may be, he will never show what he is really is.
Modi has a developed a fake dynamism among the  people and they are too much of idiots to see, that he is a monster in disguise. His thought and ideologies may be coming from something pure, but his implementations are idiotic no better than the chai seller he was. He just gets on with half assed implementation. Hurting the public more than helping them out. 
It’s not like the we Indians have any sense of public responsibility, but a leader like Modi doesn’t help much in us improving ourselves.
He is like Loki all show and fanfare. The public loves his performance, not to see what mess he creates in the background. 
His intensions however good it may be, he will never show what he is really is.
I want to say one thing read your username, it suits you!
Isolation is giving u such thoughts I suppose:)
Don’t b under d impression dat ” dis can’t happen to me” God bless u!!
If this is a ‘war’ against an invisible (and clever) enemy then one would expect the commander-in-chief to have chalked out a meticulous attack plan before sending in the troops. It is only in Hollywood & Bollywood, wars are waged with grandstanding heroics, not in real life. The upshot of PM’s announcement is there’s been utter confusion and chaos. What we needed were  clear -cut and transparent protocols so that the imposition of the lock-down wasn’t left to the whimsical interpretations of police and government babus. Our police, for instance, are trained only in taking punitive actions against people; nobody has ever told them their primary responsibility is to be of service to the people – to help people. What we saw today is indiscriminate harassment by low level police which has hampered the very essential services assured by the PM. 
As a single senior citizen, I’m staying home afraid to venture out lest I get beaten up by the police. I need drinking water but for love or money I can’t get any because the neighbourhood shop is refusing home delivery afraid of police harassment. Like me, there are many law-abiding citizens who are stuck for essentials, unsure of what’s to come in the coming days.
In a MHA notification there was a mention of Incident Commander who will be locally responsible for smooth running of affairs. No one know who these Commanders are,  how to contact them in case of an emergency. Let’s face it, it is too much to expect our babus to take any initiative unless there is any profit involved, nor are they used to exercising their grey-cells being habituated to top-down commands.
Yes, god is in the detail. No one expects the PM to work out the last detail but he should know better about the capability of the government machinery in implementing something as momentous as a nationwide lock-down. Unfortunately none of our governments – both at the Centre and State-level – have the talent for waging such a warfare. Eventually, the buck will stop at PM’s office!
such a useless writer who seems too smart…this theprint should be shut down…speaking of ITALY and USA and others who are deep down in this pandemic he is inciting India should have done this…ridiculous article…Supply chains will be properly operational once the initial shock stabilises but shitheads like this need their porkistan propaganda first
You hit the nail on its head. Neighbours envy, owners pride. Perfect and best decision by our fantastic PM Modiji
Doesn’t make sense to test asymptomatic person. As someone might be negative, but moments later you can touch a contaminated surface / object and somehow catch the virus. Better use the already limited resources for the people who have symptoms. A complete Nationwide lockdown is the only solution right now, to contain the spread of the virus and flatten the curve. Mr. Chidambaram too has backed it. And definitely he knows better about economy and policies than the writer who is just so obsessed with hating modi.
The Print. Are you Congress sponsored media
I agree with the Author here. Why can’t Modi ask Corona Virus to give us a little more time so that we prepare well and then come visit India.  IF Rahul was the PM, he would have surely done that.
The Print is Congress’s dog. They have sold thier sole to Congress and are ready to pen down whatever is thrown to them.
Carona is new to the whole world as it is to you. The way you write tell lot about you. You would have bailed like a coward at the first opportunity if you were the PM of our nation.
Can a lockdown be planned man seriously.. By the time its planned the nation will be wiped out. Its each states responsibility to make sure that people get food and if they have any issues talk to centre.. Anyway you be satisfied with Modi phobia
Definitely expected more insight from the author. 
The arguments seem one-sided and lack merit when seen from an administrative/regulator’s standpoint as well.
Had a long telephonic discussion with a couple of senior doctor friends asking (both with PG specialist degrees from MAMC) them if this lockdown was justified. Their answer: ABSOLUTELY right decision. In fact they explained that given the 14 days incubation period, ideal duration of lockdown should have been 4 weeks.
Shivam Vij: The day you show you are an expert in any discipline other than the discipline of ranting (opinionated journalist), you will earn respect in your profession. Either learn to report or shut up.
Perfect reply 👌🏼👍🏼
Where every scientist is screaming out the sentence social distancing, dude do some research before you write shit like this.. do you have any idea abt the number of hospital beds that India has ..  as for PPE.. every country is struggling with this..
Pls do  write constructive criticism
Bhai tu hi ban ja PM.
Katai anpadh jaisa baat Kar diye Sahab aap toh. Why China could control it was majorly attributed to lockdowns, why Singapore controlled it was again due to lockdowns and similarly South Korea did it. I would emphasize that testing needs to be done more and I am assuming these 21 days would be used to test asymptomatic patients or the ones who evaded testing. Government has all intelligence with them. Also in 1992 we had ration for 21 days, that was period when India was at nowhere now we are a global emerging power just imagine how much more resources we would have. I know people will struggle for sometime but all necessary provisions are there to ensure even not a single person dies from hunger. Stop spreading hate and rumours. We all need to sail together to overcome this else you can go to Wuhan please.
Singapore  &  South Korea did not implement any lockdown, infact even schools were not closed for most days. Get your facts right
Lockdown is neither  a  bold strategy nor a gamble. It is an inevitable fair accompli. Will it bring desired results ? We don’t know yet.  Will economic costs be  very high? Probably yes. Are there any alternatives? No, a big NO.   The cost of  a Italy -like flare up on account of community transmission will be far higher than the costs of a stand- still economy.  Did our Prime Minister looked helpless and strained? Yes, he did.  Because he has run out of options. Will ‘test, test and test’ formula succeed? On paper, yes. In practice, it is impossible to test even a small percentage of 1.3 billion people. When will this nightmare end? We don’t know. This is the summarised position in brief.
DAMNED IF YOU DO, DAMNED IF DON’T.  Pressitute Shivam Vij and his Modi-hating pals: alas, Modi prempted you with the surprise and total lockdown.  Now enjoy your Corona isolation,  say thanks to China, and come back with your virulent rants after 3 weeks.
The Print: give this rabid pamphleteer a break. Deserves solitary confinement for the rest of his pathetic life.
You want to eat shit. Eat it. Apologies, currently am locked down,  ant serve em to you.
Stop writing shit and find a good ass… oh yeah this is the result of that. Isn’t it?
Where do you guys come up with shit when every one is crying. You leech.
Stay safe. If I get a chance to meet you, I want you alive.
1. Developing an inhouse testing infrastructure is important first before going into “Testing, Testing , Testing” mode, which is happening  example Mylabs collaboration.
2. No matter how many arrangements of ventilators/test kits are arranged, they will never be enough for a hugely populous country like India. This is why a lockdown is more necessary to prevent getting into that stage.
3. Why is the article just biased on criticizing government. Why is not the common man’s fault as it is our indiscipline-not being able to practice self control , restrain, That is whats needed in a situation right now. If people comply why would stricter measures be necessary.
4. Also  India is a country which runs on emotion and not just logic purely. Thats what leaders are there for, they are not there to micromanage. They are there to inspire and give direction, which Modi has shown that people listen to him.
5. Lets get out of this mode of government needs to do everything.
Dear Shivam,
You really do have the answers to all the problems societies faces today.   It must be immensely frustrating for a man of boundless talent to be in the midst of  inept politicians and having to pontificate about the good you could to all of us. Have you ever considered rising above this and leading mankind out of this darkness? If you have not, then waste no time. There is no better time than now to put all your ideas to test.  Try leading India for a month  and see for yourself. Just shout out and offer yourself. A man of your talent should see a beeline outside your office. If that is too much, try leading a state in India. See how things work for you.
Dear author
You’re angering bhakts
They only want to hear what modi says and feel happy
Well, they won’t accept if you try and change that vibe whether what you’re reporting is true or false
I was just started to read Shivam again- after a gap of so many months, just to get an alternate view and then he throw the crap on fan!!! He is a perfect representative of “KMG” who will criticize everything- if it is done by Modi. He will not shy to make false corollary- India with Italy – no matter the difference in size, India with China-    No matter how much money and authoritarian power they have. And if This lockdown has not happened and people will start dying he will Blame Modi again..so dam you do dam you not..
Nonsense, you think the countries you have listed have handled corona properly, and you are praising China who spread it worldwide?? Are you sure you yourself dont suffer from a brain disease. Why does anyone even print your nonsense!
ur article onli demotivates the reader and spreads negativity!!! in these trying times at least encourage ppl to do what is to b done..rather than predicting the future of the economy…calling spade is spade isnt a bad thing at all…but just demoralising ppl is not a good thing in the first place!!! finding loopholes would b someonz passion..but at the moment ppl need motivation to pass through this phase…was say did u have when ppl werent listening to Mr. Modi pleaing to the nation to b indoors…if ppl dont do their part tje government has to take some action…Life is more important than ECONOMY!!!
Great article… resonates my opinion.
China moved to seal off Hubei Province, the source of the pandemic. Once the virus is carried to multiple destinations within a country, there is no single area that can be sealed off. So all the recipient countries have to seal off almost all of their areas. This, the author seems to have missed out due to either ignorance or blind prejudice. Sad state of journalism.
Silly Shivam 🙂
If people die of hunger or for  failing to access  health care it will not be a Corona statistic.
I dont think i can ever look at this site THE PRINT again as i think they do not verify any write ups and just to get the attention/viewership post something as stupid and illogical like this.
You evidently belong to  5 percent gated community Indian. Rest will be hard put to get to hospital during medical emergencies and child birth  because of absence of transport and may not get access to food during the lockdown.
In fact prevention is this case is prevention of transmission of infection from gated community to slums and other gated communities.
I think you don’t know the vehicle called as ambulance and one more thing it’s free to call them for medical emergency.
The article is good. But, you need to understand the seriousness of this pandemic.Italy’s President had been crying that he is unable to save his people. This is the time to break the chain of this serious pandemic. With India being densely populated, do you even have the idea how fast this can spread and become a fatal concern to our loved ones around. If people don’t listen, government needs to take strict actions to stop the spread. Have you seen other countries like USA,Mexico & Italy take the help of their military forces to control the people. This is for you and your society’s welfare. Please don’t  make it a political issue.
Everything is political. Go to Ayodhya and see.
Exact what I wanted to say
If u r infected with corona infection still u can’t work for at least 1 month ….if u survive …so beete to b at home and take care of ourselves and then start working after 21 days…
Well said Sai. The man who wrote this article is just plain stupid.  There is no other way to stop the spread which is possibly 10 times higher already  than the official figures. The only sensible this man wrote that more emphasis should have gone into actual testing…but hpw do you test 1.3 billion people?? Who will you test?? especially since many will spread the disease while they are still asymtomatic. So the next best thing to do was to impose curfew on all so that the disease remains localized.
I agree 100%
Some anti modi will always try to find mistake in his action.
The Print is always been biased.
Print is not only prejudiced against Modiji but it’s against Bharat and Hindus ! It may be funded by ISI. Indian media must boycott these morons totally.
Well said.. here reporter seems not happy with Modi..but he doesn’t understand our people are in danger and  lock down is must..while I agree that govt must ensure poor people are getting food and essential medical facilities.
He will not see other side of the story . His aka ordered him to publish negative news. He is much bigger economist than Aditya Puri
Modi doesn’t have Forwarded eyes to see what happened in China and so far in the whole world since December 2019. What was he doing since December? Why he didn’t stopped international travellers to enter our home country since 01 January 2020 ? What health ministry was doing till 21 March 2020 ? If prevention took place this things never happened in current scenario and the media is busy in hiding Bad Governance of Mr Modi and the only thing is to blame Muslims aspecially Tablighi Jamaat…. Shame on you first, Shame on Modi and his Poor Governance and Indian Godi media for hiding the real facts.
This moron needs rest from writing shit day in & day out.The plan rolled out by the PM will eventually be successful is something to be seen.The way this guy writes epithet is beyond logic.The countries he was referring to as successful examples of containing the virus are those with lesser population.The writer seems to be everything under the sun
China lesser population than India! Who’s the Morin, you?
Moron not Morin.
I agree with u sir, these guy wantedly tries to degrade our PM . He cannot suggest any thing but just tries to write some random shit. Observing all his articles from past few months..
MODIJI we share your concern for the nation. You have informed people that medical and kirana service will be operational. MODIJI it is the responsibility of respective state governments to care and ensure support to poor and the needy
 .  MODIJI there are a lot of STUPID people who will blame you for being pro active. Stupidity is a virus that has has no medication
Bro, how do you manage a bigger font and a photo for the sh”t that you publish? Definitely better columnists at Print
Social isolation is the best way to stop the spread, this was the message exhorted by the PM yesterday. If successful, all other issues can be solved. Even Mr.Chidambaram , an ideological opposite, has approved of this.
In times like this its better to exercise reticence and caution. Some of your suggestions are constructive and shall be directly sent to PMO’s office as it would merit attention. For example those referring to the movement of food and essential items and farm products are worth considering. Shooting in the air doesn’t help at such extraordinary times.
The author is just cribbing about whatever Government is doing, without any meaningful explanation. The 21 days lockdown is very much required as there is no other way to stop the pandemic and it will not kill the virus but definitely stop its spread.
You should refrain from publishing such articles in times of such crisis
Of course such an article was expected from Shivra Vij and ilk. Nothing new.
“The devil is in the details”?? Surely not!! Detail (singular) please. When writing his tirade, the author should take care with his English.
Are you an expert in English?  Both are used: detail and details. 
https://www.phrases.org.uk/meanings/the-devil-is-in-the-details.html
Please take care of your English first.
Now we have come to English from corona. Let us take if there is any good  point in the article and leave  the rest to trash. For a country  like India I am afraid 21 days lock-down may not be sufficient.  I am afraid further lock-down may be necessary. But the repercussions  my be seen . There are laks daily wage earners  house less beggars. 21 days are just for buying  time . Modi,  one man alone, cannot do everything . Co-operation of every one is necessary.  Health workers should be provided with protective equipment.  People implementing the schemes should forego their usual commission. Medical facilities should be set up speedily and protective equipments should be imported.  This is a war like situation. Action and cooperation of all is the need of the hour.
Someone querentine this reporter. Otherwise he’ll kill with his reporting.
Someone querentine this guy. Otherwise he’ll kill with his reporting.
As a contributing editor you seem to be contributing all the trash these days. I ain’t a great fan of Modi, but given the country’s potential (large population, poor hygiene etc) to take the infection deep in to its 1.2 billion population, lockdown appears to be the way forward. No country in the world, however advanced they may be, has an exit strategy in place; either in the form of a vaccine, antibodies test or anything else. India is no exception. 
Stop this rubbish Vijvani and start contributing to journalistic and/or the nation’s cause(s) please. Modi bashing is a boring game.
Another rant from someone who believes he knows everything better than every one else! The people of India know better than these pompous experts who cannot find anything good in India unless their deity the Gandhi family is back in power. Their writings are a reflection of their impotence in a new & changing India.
High time the Print puts the author in indefinite quarantine.
Not being able to harvest the Rabi crop systematically will be a huge setback. Demonetisation had occurred at the confluence of Kharif harvesting and Rabi sowing, both occasions when the economy needs vast amounts of currency, to pay farmers for their crop and for them to buy inputs for sowing. 2. Progressively since early January, the whole world has been aware of Covid 19. Time enough for governments to plan their responses, gear up their healthcare systems, with a lot of improvisation, to deal with a rush of patients. At a time of widespread economic distress, the needs of the poorest Indians, related to their sheer survival, have to be the centrepiece of all planning. No one will mind if a large, conventional relief package for troubled sectors does not materialise immediately. 3. The action has shifted to the state governments. They have to streamline the movement and sale of essential commodities. Offer whatever financial assistance they can afford, although they need generous support from the Centre.
Well written. Of course bhakts won’t listen. In the end people get the government they deserve.
And u write that anonymously..😂
As if you are writing your full name 🙂
Too bad you didn’t what you don’t deserve, you fool.
Only allah can save the mullahs in Friday prayer
Rahul Gandhi ka IQ level dikh raha hai is article mai. Has he moved to mainstream journalism already? 😮😛😂
