‘Exercise, exercise, exercise’ — out-of-detention Omar Abdullah’s guide to self-isolation
New Delhi: Former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister and National Conference leader Omar Abdullah, who was recently released after nearly eight months in detention, offered tips to survive the 21-day coronavirus quarantine based on his experience Wednesday.
In a detailed thread on Twitter, Abdullah advised people to stick to a routine so that they have a sense of purpose and don’t feel aimless.
“Firstly establish a routine & try to stick to it. In all the months I was in HNSJ (Hari Niwas Sub-Jail) I stuck to a routine as though it were carved in stone. The routine gave me a sense of purpose & stopped me feeling aimless or lost.”
He also recommended going to sleep, waking up and eating meals at a fixed time, adding one should not spend their entire day in their night suit.
“I woke up & went to bed around the same time EVERY DAY. No lazy Sunday morning lie ins for me. Get up & get ready. Having no where to go is no reason to spend all day in your nightsuit. I lived in trackpants but I never slept in them or sat around in my PJs”, said Abdullah.
I woke up & went to bed around the same time EVERY DAY. No lazy Sunday morning lie ins for me. Get up & get ready. Having no where to go is no reason to spend all day in your nightsuit. I lived in trackpants but I never slept in them or sat around in my PJs 4/n
— Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) March 25, 2020

And the final word of advice Abdullah had for everyone in quarantine was to “exercise, exercise, exercise”. Stating that he couldn’t underscore this point enough, he also mentioned his workout routine, which comprised walking, burpees and other exercises he had downloaded on fitness apps such as Nike Training Club & Fitbod.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Exercise, exercise, exercise.I can’t emphasise this point enough. I was fortunate to have space & access to the grounds in HNSJ to get outside but even when the weather didn’t permit I exercised indoors – walking  in the corridor, up & down the stairs or just endless burpees 6/n
— Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) March 25, 2020

Abdullah, along with other political leaders from Jammu and Kashmir, was detained on 5 August 2019 after the Narendra Modi government scrapped Article 370, which gave the erstwhile state special status. On 6 February, Abdullah and People’s Democratic Party president Mehbooba Mufti were slapped with the  Public Safety Act, on the day their six-month detention under Section 107 of Code of Criminal Procedure was supposed to end.
232 days after my detention today I finally left Hari Niwas. It’s a very different world today to the one that existed on 5th August 2019. pic.twitter.com/Y44MNwDlNz
— Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) March 24, 2020

He was released on 24 March after 232 days in detention. Incidentally, on the same day, PM Modi announced a 21-day nationwide lockdown to battle the coronavirus pandemic. which has infected more than 4.7 lakh people across the world. More than 550 cases and 10 deaths have been confirmed in India.
The prime minister advised people to self-isolate in their homes and practise social distancing. Shortly after the lockdown was announced, Abdullah took to Twitter with a meme on him and said, “These are serious & scary times so a little humour doesn’t hurt”.
These are serious & scary times so a little humour doesn’t hurt. pic.twitter.com/V0NA7tb0sU
— Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) March 25, 2020
