Meerut cancer hospital wants Muslims to come only after getting Covid-19 negative test report
New Delhi: A cancer hospital in Meerut is facing heat for an ad it published Friday, in which it directed Muslim patients to seek treatment at its facility only if they’ve tested negative for Covid-19. Furthermore, it also mandated that Muslim patients should be accompanied by a caretaker who has also tested negative for the highly infectious disease.
The ad resulted in several complaints of discrimination and a warning from the district administration to the hospital to roll back the new rule or risk losing its medical license.
“For the purpose of maintaining the security of the hospital staff and patients, the hospital requests all new Muslim patients that they and one caretaker with them get tested for Covid-19 and come to the hospital only if their reports are negative.”
Valentis Cancer Hospital had posted the advertisement in the daily Dainik Jagran, and claimed that several Muslim patients had not followed the rules and regulations, such as using a mask and maintaining cleanliness, and misbehaved with staff.

While it explicitly said all Muslims will have to produce their negative test results, the ad also listed out a few exemptions.
“The rule does not apply to doctors, paramedical staff, judges, police officers as well as those Muslims who do not live in areas with high Muslim population,” it stated.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
As complaints came in, the hospital maintained that the advertisement was not discriminatory, but later issued an apology.
“We just appealed to all people of the country to support our health officers and administration and not create problems as that would be dangerous for everyone,” Dr Amit Jain, an oncologist who is part of the hospital management team, told ThePrint.
“Seventy per cent of our patients are Muslims, thousands of Muslims in the past have been cured of cancer in our hospital. Some people are just creating false propaganda,” he added.
However, when asked about the phrasing of the advertisement and how it singled out one community, Dr Jain said, “Some words were twisted and may have been written incorrectly.”
“We just meant to say that people who are in hotspots should get screened,” he added.
Also read: Covid an excuse to push Indian Muslims out of informal sector jobs. Apartheid the next step
The advertisement had cited the cases that emerged in various parts of the country which were linked to the Tablighi Jamaat congregation that took place in Delhi last month. As authorities worked to trace all the attendees of the congregation and quarantine them, there were reports of some people misbehaving with health workers.
“Them repeatedly not following the guidelines, not being cautious, troubling the hospital staff, only shows their ill-intention,” the ad said.
It further said the actions of a few Muslims was resulting in the community having to endure some hardships.
“It is due to the ignorance and ill-intention of some Muslim brothers that all Muslim brothers will have to suffer for some time. But this is important in larger public interest and also in the interest of Muslim brothers,” the advertisement stated.
The ad also referenced “wealthy Hindus/Jains among whom many are miserly” as it appealed to people to donate to the PM-CARES relief fund, set up by Prime Minister Narendra Modi to raise money for the country’s Covid-19 efforts.
Also read: Hindu, Muslim NRI groups pan ‘escalation of Islamophobia’ in India after Tablighi incident
Valentis published an apology Saturday, but only added more fuel to the fire by stating that it didn’t mean to hurt Hindu and Jain sentiments. It, however, did not address the issue of separate rules for Muslim patients nor did it clarify if it was in effect.
“Some people of the Hindu and Jain faith have been hurt due to our notice yesterday. A wrong message was sent and we regret it and ask for forgiveness,” the apology read.
It also said, “If any Hindu/Muslim/Sikh/Christian was hurt because of our advertisement, we apologise.”

“It was supposed to be a more general appeal to everyone to not be miserly at this point and donate generously,” Dr Jain said, adding that the “apology was for everyone”.
Also read: Call it a mistake, not conspiracy against India, say Muslim scholars on Tablighi Jamaat event
Meerut’s Medical administration said it would take strict action against the hospital if it did not apologise and roll back its new patient rule soon.
“We have issued a notice to them today (Sunday). If they don’t tender an apology in the next three days, we will revoke their license. They need to explicitly take back the ruling. No such language and discrimination is allowed in our country,” Raj Kumar, Chief Medical Officer, Meerut district administration, told ThePrint.
The Valentis Hospital ad had also stated that in cases of an emergency, Muslims will be admitted to the hospital but the samples of the patient and the caretaker will be mandatorily collected and screened at the patient’s expense. Each Covid-19 test costs Rs 4,500.
The Incholi Police station, under whose jurisdiction the hospital falls, has registered an FIR on the Meerut Police’s orders.
उपरोक्त प्रकरण के सम्बन्ध में थाना प्रभारी इन्चौली को आवश्यक कार्यवाही हेतु निर्देशित किया गया ।
— MEERUT POLICE (@meerutpolice) April 18, 2020

Brijesh Kumar Singh, the station house officer (SHO) of the Incholi Police station, said the hospital administration had been booked and an investigation is ongoing.
“We have registered an FIR against them under IPC Section 188 (Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant), Section 295 (insult to religion), and Section 505-3 (Statements to incite a community),” Singh told ThePrint.
While Singh said the police would try and conclude the inquiry soon, he noted “there is no timeline and deadline for such investigations”.
Also read: How Tablighi Jamaat emerged as the ‘largest known’ Covid-19 source in South Asia
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Mr. Karna Get Well Soon. Your thoughts are even more dangerous than VIRUS of Covid-19. There might be vaxine available in later days for covid-19. But for your minds virus there is no Cure for sure
Such hospital’s license should be cancelled not fined minimum 10 crore for such non sense act.
Honestly I’m shocked and feel ashamed every time these increasing events of communal hate come to light! Problem is that the sensible Indians who I still feel are in majority, are quiet. I appeal to all to raise voices against this discrimination and hatred before we become a state similar to Pakistan! India’s strength is in its secular grain, Indians of ALL religions make india great. Indian muslims chose to stay in India at partition because they believed in secularism, please lets not betray them!
Yes, I do feel bad but not surprised. We have invited this situation ourselves.
We live in strange times whn speaking the truth is called bigotry and spreading hate. But then the truth is always difficult to digest and those who speak it are always in danger.
Mr Vish: And what exactly was the “truth” you were alluding to ?  Care to clarify Sir ?
One virus is undermining China’s place in the world. Great care should be taken to avoid another virus doing the same for India. A princess from the royal family of UAE has been expressing her disappointment over rising communal discord in India. Also reminding all of us that millions of Indians earn their bread and butter in the region. Aap linkage samajhiye …
For the first time I am observing that non-Muslims are avoiding coming in touch with Muslims.  Tablighi jamat and librandus have contribute a lot to this change in non-Muslims behavior. Muslim businesses are bound to suffer even after lifting of lockdown.  Muslims playing victim card is not going to help this time. The divide between  Muslims and non-Muslims is real. It will also badly affect the Indian economy.
Mr ak.dev: India is the land of caste based hierarchies, untouchability and an pernicious form of apartheid that simply does not go away. Indeed, Indian apartheid expands its tentacles and institutionalises discrimination as this ad from this hospital seems to show. And what is even worse is that supposedly educated Indians like you justify this attitude by scapegoating Muslims and liberals. Admittedly, Tablighi Jamaat was not run by the brightest of brains and some of its adherents have behaved ir-responsibly. Such elements from the Tablighi Jamaat group should be brought to justice, no ifs and buts. 
