Giriraj Singh to post video of him eating eggs to dispel rumours amid coronavirus scare
New Delhi: Union Fisheries and Animal Husbandry Minister Giriraj Singh has decided to post a video of him eating eggs in a bid to tackle rumours about egg and meat consumption leading to coronavrius infection.
During a press meet Friday, Singh said, “Eating eggs in the morning is part of my daily routine and even today I had it. I have now decided to shoot a video of me eating eggs and post it on the social media which will help people not get misled by rumours that are spreading on social media.
“Coronavirus does not spread by eating fish, chicken, and eggs. Eggs are your important source of protein apart from chicken and fish so eat it without any fear,” he said.
The minister added that the fake messages being spread have caused panic among poultry farmers, industries and consumers.
“One of the member(s) of the poultry association told me that due to this scare the poultry and the related industry is suffering Rs 1,500-2,000 crore losses. Such kind of panic related to poultry products consumption will destroy the livelihood of millions of people,” he added.
Singh added that apart from the farmers directly involved in poultry farming, there are millions of maize and soya farmers, and medicines and vaccine manufacturers who are indirectly involved in this sector and are being affected.
Also read: Avoid festivals, malls, set up isolation wards — how Army is preparing to fight coronavirus
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The fisheries and animal husbandry ministry also issued an advisory to all the states Friday asking them to create greater awareness about the rumours being circulated.
Reacting to the Lucknow district magistrate’s instructions to ban the sale of meat and fish in the open, Giriaj Singh said states should consult the Centre and the Indian Council of Agricultural Research before issuing such directions.
The department of animal husbandry has been keeping a constant vigil on the coronavirus situation in the country and the world too, said a senior government official who didn’t wish to be named.
“So far, it has been noticed that the predominant route of transmission of novel coronavirus (2019-nCov) appears to be human interaction. The virus is transmitted through human to human (interaction) as per World Animal Health Organisation (OIE), though 2019-nCov might have animal source,” said the official.
“Poultry has not found to be involved in transmission of coronavirus to humans so far in any report globally,” the official added.
Reiterating its position on the safety of poultry products, the ministry asked people to follow general hygiene to prevent coronavirus infection.
India has seen 31 coronavirus positive cases so far, out of which three people have recovered.
