State-run liquor shops to operate from 9 am to 6.30 pm in Delhi
New Delhi: The Delhi government has issued an order allowing state-run liquor shops to operate from 9 am to 6.30 pm in the city, and directed deployment of marshals at these outlets to maintain social distancing.
According to a government official, about 150 liquor shops have been allowed to open in accordance with the latest lockdown relaxations given by the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA).
There are around 850 liquor shops in the city including those run by government agencies and private individuals.
In an order on Sunday night, the excise department also directed officials to identify liquor shops, which are being run by private individuals (L-7 licensee) and fulfil conditions laid down by the MHA. The officials have been asked them to submit a report within three days.
The government has so far allowed only those liquor shops (L-7 and L-8) to operate which are being run by four state-run agencies responsible for liquor sale in the national capital.
“All liquor shops in malls and markets will remain closed. The government-run shops allowed will operate from 9 am to 6.30 pm.
“The four agencies will deploy marshals to ensure that not more than 5 people are present at one time at the shop,” the official said.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The department has asked agencies to coordinate with the local administration and police to maintain law and order.
According to the order, bonded warehouses have been allowed to resume operation from 7 am to 6.30 pm.
The Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, the Delhi State Industrial and Infrastructure Development Corporation, the Delhi State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited and the Delhi Consumer”s Cooperative Wholesale Store have been given the permission to open liquor shops in public places, except malls and market complexes.
The agencies will have to give an undertaking stating that liquor shops being allowed to open will fulfil all MHA guidelines, according to the excise department.
