Tablighi foreigners were right under Modi govt’s nose, it should have stopped them: Baghel
New Delhi: Chhattisgarh Chief Minister Bhupesh Baghel has blamed the Modi government for the spurt in Covid-19 cases linked to the Tablighi Jamaat, saying it should have never allowed the Islamic organisation’s members to travel to states.
A congregation of the Tablighi Jamaat, a Muslim missionary group, held in Delhi’s Nizamuddin area last month was attended by thousands of people from within India and abroad. Before the authorities evacuated nearly 2,300 people from the Tablighi headquarters in the area and placed them under quarantine, hundreds of members, including those carrying Covid-19 infection, had spread across India.
The central government said last week that around 30 per cent of the total Covid-19 cases in the country were related to Tablighis.
“The government of India had the list of those (Tablighis) coming from abroad. Why did it let go of people who had gathered in Nizamuddin?” Congress leader Baghel told ThePrint in a Skype interview. “Why were they allowed to go to states? …The government of India knew there were foreigners right under its nose in Delhi. It should have stopped them.”

The central government gave a list of 107 Tablighis to the Chhattisgarh government, which managed to trace them and put them under quarantine, said Baghel. Only one of them tested positive, but he “is responsible for the spike in Covid cases in the state”, said Baghel.
The state has, however, managed to contain the spread. Out of 37 people who tested positive for Covid-19 in Chhattisgarh, 32 have been discharged. There hasn’t been a single coronavirus-related death in Chhattisgarh, where 23 of the state’s districts have been classified as green zones and only one is a red zone.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Chhattisgarh has decided to keep its borders closed even after the national lockdown is lifted on 3 May, Baghel said.
“Even if there is not a single case in the state, we will keep the border sealed as long as there is a single Covid-positive case in the country,” the chief minister added.
As for the possibility of a further extension of the nationwide lockdown, which ends on 3 May, Baghel said the decision on how to ease restrictions should be left to the discretion of states.
Also read: ‘100 Hindus’, said to be in Chhattisgarh Tablighi isolation list, complain of social boycott
Earlier this week, the chief minister wrote to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, requesting that the money deposited in the PM-CARES Fund by mining and industrial units from Chhattisgarh, under their corporate social responsibility (2 per cent of their average net profit in the preceding three years), be transferred to the state.
“These companies are not giving a paisa for the development of the area (where they are located)… There is NMDC…Balco (a Vedanta group company) is based in Korba, a red zone. It has given Rs 100 crore to the government of India… Don’t they have any responsibility for Korba?” Baghel said. “When we ask them, they say the government of India has asked them not to (give money to the state),” he added.
“I have nothing in writing… They have admitted it in the course of conversations…I have no proof. It’s clear from their conduct. It means as much.”
A senior government functionary in New Delhi, however, denied the allegation, saying, “Can he show a single circular from the Centre regarding this? He (the CM) is making baseless allegations. Why should we respond?”
The chief minister has also written to the central government seeking financial assistance of Rs 30,000 crore for the resumption of business activities in the state. “We are a producing state… cement, iron, coal… all are affected. How is it possible to restart activities without financial assistance?” he said. “You (Centre) collect the taxes, so who else should we demand it (assistance) from? The maximum collection of fees and taxes happens in March but it has been zero this time.”
Baghel attributed the state’s successful Covid-19 management to timely measures, such as the imposition of prohibitory orders under CrPC Section 144 to prevent the assembly of people from 19 March, five days before the imposition of the nationwide lockdown.
Curfew was imposed two days later. As many as 2,100 people who had travelled abroad after 1 March were put under quarantine. Inter-district movements were stopped and even villagers put up barricades to stop the entry of outsiders. “We put special emphasis on social distancing and that was the biggest safeguard,” said the CM.
Also read: Maoists blame US for Covid-19, police say they are frustrated as supply network is hit
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Why is this being carried still? From 26th April?  Even after 10 days?  Is it such an earth shaking article whose words deserve to  reverberat through the pages of History?????
So the guy want state survellence for all foreginers ! a step away from being North Korea
Modiji  or Pm  not  to be blamed. You can blame ministries directly.  Or health dept  or airport immigration etc. Thanks. Also to blame you and me and great leaders  who criticisize only  for not raising  early warnings. No point in postmortem   for the present issue. It will only help for the future.
Every crime happens under the nose of the government. The problem is when the government supports it or covers it up.
If the criminals had basic respect for the law, then we would not have had the expression of alleged criminal. There would be no business for the great lawyers to get bail.
There would also be not distinction between the honorable /  respected  and the honorable /  respected  but alleged criminal an expression meant to shame the honorable /  respected but the sad part is that it does not happen
This is very dangerous. The government should create a special cell under NIA to identify and arrest such disruptive elements and they should be handed over to the Gulf countries for fast and speedy punishment according to the Islamiic laws. They are spreading rumors and lies about the fake and false narrative about Islamophobia and endangering the lives, safety and livelihood of the Hindus in Gulf countries. They are fabricating the fake and baseless stories about the atrocities on Muslims by the government and the Hindus. This is a very dangerous game. This ugly politics is paid by the Wahabi groups and missionaries. They want to disturb the nation and communal harmony. Most of the Urban Naxal extremist groups are also involved in this.
Just see the so called secular and patriots terming Modi Gov and not Indian Gov which spills the beans.
If visa were not granted then these people – these critics of Gov would have cried foul saying – Islam khatre mein.
In fact there is a substantial population of anti Indians existing in India who are the biggest enemies than Markajis, Rohinghyas etc.
Ok now that it is understood that visa  screening was an oversight, tablighis has a terrorist footprint, terrorism funding, Gov should muzzle all these sickulars and take this opportunity to ban such outfits right away no matter how and whatever be the crocodile tears are shed on behalf of Islam.
The frogs (CMs) in the wells (states) have been taking pride themselves in controlling COVID-19
Nonsense, extent of Covid emergency was not known a few days after the Taglighi conference in Nizzamuddin.  Once it was known then they all went  into hiding to prevent any tracking or treatment or isolation. 
You are a bad analyst trying to twist the facts.
