IIT Delhi, DU, JNU, Jamia suspend classes, IIMs put off convocation as COVID-19 cases rise
New Delhi: Colleges and universities across the country are shutting down and postponing their examination and event schedule in the wake of the COVID-19 crisis.
Five higher education institutions in Delhi — Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Delhi University (DU), Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU), Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) and Indraprastha University (IP) announced postponing exams and suspension of classes till March 31 in the wake of COVID-19.
In a notice Friday, JNU Registrar Pramod Kumar informed students, staff and faculty members that all classes were suspended till 31 March and all seminars and conferences were also postponed indefinitely.
“In the wake of the situation arising out of Coronavirus (COVID-19), it is hereby notified that all lectures, class presentation and exams in JNU will be suspended till March 31,” the notice read.
IIT Delhi Director, V. Ramgopal Rao Thursday tweeted , “In view of the COVID situation, IIT Delhi has decided to cancel all classes, examinations and public gatherings with immediate effect on the campus until March 31, 2020. Please inform all concerned.”
In view of the COVID situation, IIT Delhi has decided to cancel all classes, examinations and public gatherings with immediate effect on the campus until March 31, 2020. Please inform all concerned.@iitdelhi@MHRD pic.twitter.com/PAqpSMkN5a
— V.Ramgopal Rao (@ramgopal_rao) March 12, 2020

Delhi University and IP University have also taken similar steps, however, DU has asked the faculty to report to work. “To maintain continuity in the teaching-learning process, study material shall be made available on a weekly basis,” the statement by DU said.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: Online is the future of education and thanks to coronavirus it’s already here
In other parts of the country, Indian Institutes of Management (IIMs) Ahmedabad, Lucknow, Bangalore and Indore postponed their convocation ceremony. The convocations were scheduled between 20 March and 25 March, and new dates are yet to be decided.
“In view of the advisories issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the World Health Organization to avoid large gatherings since the eruption of the COVID-19, we have decided to defer the Annual Convocation scheduled for 21st March 2020. The decision has been taken to preclude any risks to students and their extended families and friends as well as to the faculty and employees of the Institute,” said IIM Ahmedabad in a statement.
The annual technical and entrepreneurial festival of IIT Kanpur ‘Techkriti-2020’, which was scheduled to begin on 19 March, has also been postponed.
Higher Education Secretary had asked all institutions to follow protocol advised by the Health Ministry in wake of coronavirus. Following that, Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia Thursday ordered that all schools and colleges in Delhi will remain shut till 31 March.
Seventy four cases of COVID-19 have been confirmed across the country and a 76-year-old man from Karnataka was also confirmed as the first fatality in India.
