Classes to continue online until 3 May, no plan to advance summer break: HRD ministry
New Delhi: The Ministry of Human Resource Development (HRD) Wednesday asked all education institutions to maintain the academic calendar through online teaching during the second phase of the lockdown. 
The order came after the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), in fresh guidelines issued Wednesday, asked education institutions to remain shut until 3 May, when the ongoing lockdown is scheduled to end. “However, these establishments are expected to maintain the academic schedule through online teaching,” the guidelines state.
Speaking to ThePrint, HRD Secretary Amit Khare said the “detailed guidelines… issued by the MHA for the functioning of education institutions… will be followed”. “All education institutions will continue teaching through online mode,” he added.
Asked if there were plans to advance the summer vacation in schools or colleges, which usually last from May to July, a senior official of the HRD Ministry said there was no such proposal as of now. 
According to the official, the academic session, which many institutions have begun on schedule through online classes, will continue as is. 
Meanwhile, the University Grants Commission (UGC) is waiting for a report from a seven-member expert panel headed by Central University of Haryana Vice-Chancellor R.C. Kuhad. The committee was formed to take a call on conducting exams and changing the academic calendar for higher education institutes in light of the current situation. 
Exams in most higher education institutions had to be postponed because of the restrictions put in place to control the spread of coronavirus.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also Read: How India’s young IAS officers ensured a smooth lockdown in every corner of the country
Schools and colleges around the country have been shut since early March as part of social distancing norms implemented by the government to arrest the spread of Covid-19.
On Tuesday, PM Modi extended the nationwide lockdown in place since 25 March by another 19 days, until 3 May.
The guidelines issued by the MHA Wednesday seek to outline the implementation of this extended lockdown. While weighing in on education, the guidelines suggest “maximum use of Doordarshan and other educational channels for the purpose of education”.
As far as online learning is concerned, the ministry is conducting lessons through various means. Apart from digital platforms like Diksha and NCERT’s e-Pathshala, the ministry has made its educational channels available on DTH services such as Tata Sky, Airtel TV, Videocon and Dish TV. 
Under this arrangement, subject experts deliver live lectures on TV and students can ask questions through numbers given on the screen. A recorded broadcast of six hours is followed by live classes for the same duration. According to a note from the ministry issued earlier this month, “four different subject experts” conduct sessions lasting “one and half hour” each.
Schools are at liberty to decide their own programmes for online classes, as many across India have done, but can subscribe to the government service if they wish to.
Also Read: No matter how you look at it, India’s lockdown-2 can cost as many lives as it will save
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Sir,in many CBSE school teachers are failing students of class 9th and 11th. If compartment paper will we held in June or July so, when was children do study for  next classes . Sir i am requesting you to do compartment exam soon or otherwise promote all the students.
If lockdown increase the the compartment students unable to give exams and there year lost. Please
Sir,in many CBSE school teachers are failing students of class 9th and 11th. If compartment paper will we held in June or July so, when was children do study for  next classes . Sir i am requesting you to do compartment exam soon or otherwise promote all the students.
If lockdown increase the the compartment students unable to give exams and there year lost.
There is no action against Mumbai schools against fees during lockdown and no rules for icse schools Mumbai school only gives direction for state schools….
But what about the students of backward areas ,we are facing problems of internet connectivity.Although there are classes going on we are unable to join.plz recognise our problems.
Sir, what about the class XI compartment exams. As we know it would be held after school reopening but oon line classess for class XII in the meantime will be going on. How come the compartment students focus. Please help me.
The last session was already over, and next session is two months away. Why the schools trouble the children by resorting to online classes. It’s anyway onset of summer vacation. The education administrators should rethink over this aspect.
Going online ……its locked down …
Will all majority buy computers etc .
Average middle class got money to eat daily now .
Most of the items are sold hiked prices  due to lockdown ..
More than MRP …
What about the insurance  of students?
No profit with the online class pour students what can a do??
