How BJP MP Tejasvi Surya’s five-year-old tweet about orgasms kicked up a row, again
MP Tejasvi Surya’s ‘disrespectful’ 2015 tweet on Arab women kicks up new row, deletes post
A 2015 tweet by BJP MP Tejasvi Surya, which quoted “objectionable” comments about Arab women, caused much controversy when it resurfaced recently. He deleted the tweet after he was called out by several prominent citizens of Arab nations, reports Rohini Swamy.
Coronavirus has brought India’s almighty Centre back, and Modi’s unlikely to give up control
Four decades of federal evolution made India more secure, but Covid-19 has made Centre give itself extraordinary powers, which have pushed states to beg, writes Shekhar Gupta in this week’s National Interest.
Satyajit Ray’s ‘Feluda’ will soon detect coronavirus in minutes, thanks to CSIR scientists
Two scientists at the Council of Scientific & Industrial Research’s Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (CSIR-IGIB) in New Delhi have developed a paper-based test strip to detect coronavirus and named it after the beloved detective character Feluda, created by Bengali filmmaker-author Satyajit Ray, reports Shanker Arnimesh.
Uddhav Thackeray has failed to handle Covid crisis. Bring in Army to save Mumbai
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
With 1,936 cases distributed equally across the city, and densely-populated slum clusters like Dharavi and Govandi fast emerging as new hotspots of Covid-19, Mumbai is staring at a massive crisis that the Uddhav Thackeray government has failed to contain, BJP member Tuhin A. Sinha writes in this 18 April opinion piece. It is now time to bring in the Indian Army, he says.
It’s time Arvind Kejriwal joined the NDA, à la Nitish Kumar
Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal lost his political capital rather quickly after winning an absolute majority in February due to the various crises in Delhi — the communal riots, Covid-19 and the migrants’ exodus. This was made worse by the incessant attacks on him by BJP leaders. The only way for Kejriwal to avoid this political rollercoaster is to join the NDA, just as Nitish Kumar did in Bihar, writes contributing editor Shivam Vij.
BCG vaccine trials to begin in 2 weeks on high-risk Covid-19 groups in Maharashtra
The CEO of Serum Institute of India, Adar Poonawalla, has said India is all set to conduct trials to test the efficacy of the bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine to boost immunity against Covid-19. The trials are likely to start in Maharashtra, reports Himani Chandna. 
Lav Agarwal, a ‘reticent’ IIT grad, Andhra IAS officer who’s the face of India’s Covid fight
From a nerdy IITian to the face of India’s Covid-19 fight, Lav Agarwal is now the most important IAS officer in India. As joint secretary in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, he has been the government’s voice during the daily Covid-19 press briefings. And according to his colleagues, he is the best man for the job, reports Sanya Dhingra.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
