IS tries to provoke Muslims, says countries fighting coronavirus are easy targets
New Delhi: As the world grapples with the coronavirus pandemic, terror organisation Islamic State’s chat groups are abuzz with messages on how the outbreak has provided an opportunity to carry out attacks as countries have become “easy target”. The messages also urge Indian Muslims “to act”, ThePrint has learnt.
The primary missive that is being circulated on the chat groups that IS runs on various social media platforms is a clipping of a note published in the terror network’s magazine called Sawt al-Hind (Voice of Hind).
“Allah has made this disease a source of chaos amongst the nations of disbelief and their militaries and police have been deployed in their streets and alleys, thus making them an easy target,” said the note published in one of the terror network’s branches in the Khorasan province.
ThePrint has seen the note, but couldn’t ascertain the date of its publishing.
The note added that this opportunity should be utilised to carry out terror strikes. “Use this opportunity to strike them with a sword or a knife or even a rope is enough to stop their breath, fill the streets with blood,” it said.
One of the terror operatives who were allegedly involved in the publication of the magazine was a Kashmiri named Jahanjeb Sami. He was arrested by the Delhi Police earlier this month, along with his wife, said sources.
Both were linked to IS’ Khorasan module, which carried out a terror attack on a gurdwara in Kabul Wednesday, killing 25 people.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
This note being circulated through chat groups is a tactic to recruit people, said a source in the Indian intelligence, who highlighted the possibility of the Islamic State planning an attack.
“It is always a possibility that they are planning something, considering what happened in Kabul, and these signs cannot be taken lightly. But, this seems more like a tactic to recruit more youngsters,” the source said.
Also read: Army doctor and JCO test positive for Covid-19, both had travelled to Delhi separately
Another Sawt al-Hind note that is being circulated on these chat groups addresses Indian Muslims, asking them to act.
“…what the Muslims of India have suffered is not hidden from anybody. How many from among the Muslims were brutally killed and how many of the masjids have been demolished. Now is the time to act,” it said.
The note also said that this disease is the punishment and “wrath of Allah up on the disbelievers” and they should make it worse for them.
“The ever-increasing rate of COVID 19 that we are witnessing is a torment for the disbelievers and has brought the glad tidings for the believers… O Muwahideen, prepare with whatever you have and rise up. And make it worse for the Kuffar (infidel),” it said.
“You must not forget how the disbelievers dealt with you brothers and sisters in Mosul, Baghuz, Kunar, burying them alive beneath the debris,” it added.
Also read: Overcrowded Agra jail releases 71 inmates accused of theft, robbery amid coronavirus scare
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
The print has become a professional propagator of kurasan model. Markaz Nizamudin are executing it. Shameful,everybody should  condemn it.
shame on you print. Why you are circulating fake news just for money? Tomorrow you have to show your face to God. What you’ll get by defaming Muslims it will speard hatred and Muslims will get killed. This is want you want? For what just for money you are sold. Shame on you
Ye log mentally retired hai,they need treatment in Muslim hospital.
How low can you get by publishing such articles which has no verified Or credible sources in such times. Can you clarify what you want convey through this article.?
The Print seem to be a super spreader of their message… While the article mentioned the message of such satans but didn’t even said a word to condemn such messages… The Print proved really its ethics…. Shame on u The Print
Exactly
What a virile group……its high time muslims stand up against this people who is spreading lies and terror in the name of islam….do they take all muslims to be idiots….what they preach is not even remotely related to islam or to any religion….COVID19 is soon gona come for them as well…hope it does as well
There are just too many Muslims who take the Quran literally… and too many others who couldn’t care less about the violence done in the name of Islam.
