Homoeopathy for coronavirus: Is AYUSH commitment to alt meds healthy or promoting quackery?
AYUSH ministry issued a health advisory Wednesday for the prevention of coronavirus infections through homoeopathy and Ayurveda. It included recommendations such as taking 500 mg of samshamani vati twice a day and putting two drops of sesame oil in each nostril every morning. India is now among the countries which are at ‘high risk’ from virus outbreak.
ThePrint asks: Homoeopathy for coronavirus: Is AYUSH commitment to alt meds healthy or promoting quackery?
Keshav Desiraju
Former health secretary
When it comes to a public health crisis, there is no time to waste. I believe the coronavirus is a matter of great concern, considering the Director General of WHO recently called on Chinese President Xi Jinping.
On AYUSH’s latest advisory on coronavirus, I will say that homoeopathy practitioners are free to work and prescribe medicines within their framework. AYUSH training institutions, whether it’s those in Uttar Pradesh that specialise in Ayurveda and Unani or those in Tamil Nadu that specialise in Siddha, are meant to develop a workforce that operates strictly within their authorisation. Also, patients coming to AYUSH practitioners should specifically seek AYUSH remedies. Homoeopathy should not be treated as an alternative to ‘western medicine’ as outlined in the Medical Council Act, 1956. Also, it’s a bit early to say that the AYUSH advisory is the Narendra Modi government’s only response.
I believe we should not wait to see how the coronavirus epidemic snowballs. I’m sure the Directorate General of Health Services under the Ministry of Health has sounded all the alarm bells and is committed to evacuating Indians from China and putting in place a system for their entry in India.
Sumaiya Shaikh
Neuroscientist, author and Editor, AltNews
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Homoeopathy is the least scientific among various forms of alternative therapies. It has no evidence of treating major disorders, including the latest threat of coronavirus infections. Reviews of research conducted by homoeopaths have revealed data manipulations, overstretching of results, and statistical frauds to conclude their efficacy. The research has not only been found to be of sub-quality and inconsistent with the mechanisms of evidence-based drug research, but also difficult to replicate in large-scale studies.
Evidence-based medicine takes years, if not decades, to develop. Alternative treatments for newly found diseases emerge with claims of treating them within days or weeks, the microscopic structure of the virus was not found until 1931.
Homoeopathy research remains a waste of tax-payers’ money and should not be a part of public healthcare. Its drug packaging in the market should include appropriate labelling of any evidence (rather a lack of) reported in its research studies.
Moreover, government platforms suggesting the use of homoeopathy during a deadly pandemic is nothing short of irresponsible. While governments in the West are excluding homoeopathy from public health, India has been consistently adding value to it and other alternative drugs that have little scientific evidence to support their claims.
Piyush I. Joshi
Secretary General, Homoeopathic Medical Association of India
Homoeopathy is not quackery and has had a long tradition of preventive support for all types of infections. It even played a significant role in the 1980 influenza epidemic.
The exact clinical picture of coronavirus is missing as of now, which means comprehensive examinations and studies of its severity are of extreme necessity. However, this is a job for clinical laboratories that risk a patient’s life for the sake of research. The world has pumped in a lot of time and money into studying patients with diseases like AIDS and yet they remain incurable.
Homoeopathy serves not just as a preventive measure, but as a simultaneous process of studying a patient’s symptoms and treating them effectively. It focuses on symptoms that function as reflections of the internal disease. So, it is not premature to apply homoeopathy to patients infected by coronavirus, even though it is a new and relatively unknown virus. Homoeopathy is scientific.
Homoeopathy takes a holistic approach to study a patient’s experience with the disease and observations noted by relatives. It also derives common ‘bases’ between patients and considers the chronology of symptoms. Only then a remedy is put forth. AYUSH’s advisory on preventing coronavirus may appear generic, but they are the fundamentals of hygiene and maintaining an immune system that can fight such dangerous diseases.
RV Asokan
Secretary General, Indian Medical Association
AYUSH is promoting quackery in its latest advisory on preventing coronavirus. While I do believe that Ayurveda and other forms of naturopathy are an integral part of the history of medicine, modern medicine is more transparent and understands its limitations. We remain responsible for what we say and advise.
Any preventive scientific method has to follow certain basic standards. A simple vaccine, for example, must undergo a double-blind test in order to reproduce results in an unbiased manner. Homoeopathy does not follow standard protocols and most of its methods are based on surmises.
Medicine and its different systems have evolved over centuries. Advances in modern medicine are transparent and in public domain. The same cannot be said about others. They need to evaluate their advances from ancient concepts. If a medical discipline lacks basic pharmacopoeia and is not transparent about the possible side effects of a particular drug, then it is not scientific.
I think the reason India has the world’s largest administrative framework for homoeopathy is that we as a nation need to work on our scientific temperament.
Also read: Economist, Soros: Has Hindu nationalism increased global criticism of India or bad economy?
By Pia Krishnankutty, journalist with ThePrint
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Homeopathy  can also be used at acute stage of diseases. The critics of homeopathy  can go through the  repertory , materia medical etc different books and can have a test case by selection where he feels moderate risk is involved to treat a patient and prescribe a prudently selected medicine and observe for 24 hours and see the progress of the patient and will be astonished. In homeopathy selection of medicine by observation by the doctor and experience of the patient is most important. This therapy does not has any specific medicine for any specific disease. This therapy is based completely on symptoms on mind.and different organs of body. And medicine is selected based on that and it hits on the metabolism by which particular symptom is developed and heals it and disease is cured.
Pick Me Up And Put Me To Test “
Please do not try to trace any forum to air propaganda against Ayurveda / Homeopathy and Unani or anything Indian to dissuade someone using them. If some  plants are toxic or poisonous or dangerous  ,like Datura/ धतूरा, Calotropis/ मदार/ अकौआ, Parthenium/ गाजर घास, Nerium Oleander, Ricinus/ Castor Beans/ अरंडी, Plumeria/ चम्पा / Frangipani/ गुलचीन, tobacco , Ganja , Crab’s Eye Plant/ Rosary Pea/ गुंची, Cascabela thevetia/ Yellow Oleander/पीला कनेर, Dieffenbachia, Cerbera odollam/ सरबेरा ओडोलम , then if some other  plants produces Vitamins and nutritional that are required for human body like (You can long list them by yourself ) then,  logically all can say that the plants have some bad and good effect on human body.
When such plants have destructive and digestive and supportive elements or extracts in them logically, intelligently, with bare minimum commonsense, we can also say that they will have also some Corona curative elements in them. Identification of ‘that” particular plant is the only issue. That needs modern R&D labs to check knowledge from ancient Ayurveda
If some think Germans are more intelligent and when both Indians and German use Homeopathy, then why do some Indians underestimate Indians?
Ignore “itchers (ditchers) of India .  Cowhage (: Liguminosae) (also known as Kiwach, Alkushi, Nasugunnni kai or Nai”corna”) have a heavy itching producing seeds. Some ignorant people get itching when you support Homeopathy or Ayurveda.
Let us ignore them & say GTH to them. Use modem techniques and labs to experiment or to develop “anti corona virus or spray or immune essences or extracts’ from various plants around us. I am sure; you will find one with anti Corona Curative capabilities. Long Live Indian Ayurveda, Indian Homeopathy and Indian Unani!
Look that plant, outside your lab is calling you; don’t think it is due to wind ; it may be saying to you “Pick Me Up And Put Me To Test”.  All the best Indian Scientists and Pharma companies! Kind attention of Indian Govt to allocate funds for R&D .
Most of what AYUSH states is in fact propaganda.
Homeopathy is especially propaganda. They don’t want you to find out that every major scientific country has thoroughly studied Homeopathy though thousands of studies and proved that nothing worked. Every National Science Academy, every government report found that it is worthless and is a pseudoscience. They all said that homeopaths mislead.
Basically every european country, Russia, US, Canada and even our IIT Bombay stated that Homeopathy is a pseudoscience.
Now homeopaths claiming otherwise is what propaganda means.
Testing plants is great. The problem is when people say it works without actually testing it properly. This is what Ayurveda people do. They say they have cure for everything, but don’t have any studies. And when studied, nothing turns out good.
All these prestigious academies say that homeopaths mislead (propaganda).
Report Name: Homeopathic products and practices: assessing the evidence and ensuring consistency in regulating medical claims in the EU
Google it and read it yourself.
“Homeopathic remedies are ‘nonsense and risk significant harm’ say 29 European scientific bodies”
“The body recommended that EU states set up regulations to quash what it claims are misleading advertisements by homeopaths, remove homeopathic treatments from public health provision, and require that homeopathic product labels clearly identify ingredients and their amounts.”
I won’t repeat the dozen governments which also declared that Homeopathy is a fake system. Find that list below in one of my other posts (18 April).
The Austrian Academy of Sciences
The Royal Academies for Science and the Arts of Belgium
The Bulgarian Academy of Sciences
The Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts
The Czech Academy of Sciences
The Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters
The Estonian Academy of Sciences
The Council of Finnish Academies
The Académie des sciences (France)
The German National Academy of Sciences Leopoldina
The Academy of Athens
The Hungarian Academy of Sciences
The Royal Irish Academy
The Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei (Italy)
The Latvian Academy of Sciences
The Lithuanian Academy of Sciences
The Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences
The Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters
The Polish Academy of Sciences
The Academy of Sciences of Lisbon
The Romanian Academy
The Slovak Academy of Sciences
The Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts
The Spanish Royal Academy of Sciences
The Swiss Academies of Arts and Sciences
The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences
The Royal Society (United Kingdom)
Academia Europaea
All European Academies (ALLEA)
These are all top scientists from every field. Even IIT Bombay joined now, a couple of days ago.
Now back to you.
“When such plants have destructive and digestive and supportive elements or extracts in them logically, intelligently, with bare minimum commonsense, we can also say that they will have also some Corona curative elements in them.”
That is actually neither logical nor intelligent. There is no common sense in that statement. If some plants are useful does not automatically guarantee that there is a plant for every problem or that they work well. There might be or there might not be. Nobody is saying plants are not worthy of research. But please don’t say you have a solution without actual research first. Prove it and only then recommend to people. To recommend, first there needs to be good knowledge (research). AYUSH has so far been a failure at good research. Maybe, they need to dissolve it and remake it with actually intelligent people because the ones talking sound stupid all the time.
If we want to make an end to never endin blah blah
 if the critucs of of homoeopathy in here are genuinely ignorant or are stubbornly arrgoant if they are no members of these paid brigades,  I throw a simple challenge of ₹ 10 lakhs. If someone proves that Homoeopathy doesn’t work, he can take the amount, and if we prove that it has miraculous power of healing, pay ₹ 10 lakh.
Otherwise please stop commenting on the subject about which you have no knowledge.
I’m giving my contact number. Please call if any one accepts the challenge
9609909967
People who have no concept of science or research should just keep quiet.
Your quack magic sugar pill scam has already been disproven by every major country.
I posted statements from 12 government organizations below that it is proven as pseudoscience (18 April, 2020 at 2:19 am).
You can verify every statement.
Go ahead and prove it is miraculous by doing a proper study that any scientist can repeat to verify.
But you totally lack any even basic education to know how to do that.
You quacks are so uneducated and unintelligent that you have no concept of what proof means.
Your proof is like this. Have a headache? Take this sugar pill. Headache went away because no headache stays forever, it is all because of this sugar pill.
Any one educated laughs about your childish concepts of proof.
Read this
https://thelogicofscience.com/2016/02/10/5-reasons-why-anecdotes-are-totally-worthless/
Your challenge is a joke. Use that 10 lakhs to get real education that your college failed to give you.
So stop arguing at articles talking about the lack of proof for quack medicine. Your lack of intelligence/education is obvious.
I think there’s no point arguing here endlessly. We must understand that there are paid brigades to criticize and malign homoeopathy. This paid brigade becomes hyperactive whenever, homoeopathy makes the headline. They make such scathing attacks that any sane person would be becomes too shy to go to a Homeopath, lest he be branded the most foolish person of the universe.
Just see the headlines of the article. !!! There’s no substance in it to prove the headline,  but see how it makes ths sound like an empty tin!!!!
Just like your homeo magic energy sugar pill delusion, you also live in your paid brigade delusion.
When you can’t answer the fact that every scientist regards homeopathy as pseudoscience and every national health organization calls it quackery, “paid brigade” is the only way you can lie to yourself.
That is all you have delusions, delusions, delusions – placebo delusions, anecdote delusions, fake energy delusions, conspiracy delusions and finally these paid brigade delusions.
There is no substance in homeo sugar pills, literally not even one molecule, so it is quite funny for you to complain about a factual headline.
Not a single homeopath or Ayurvefic practioner coming forward with a challenge that he will treat the Covid -19 patients……..not even 1.There is a prize of millions of dollars for the homeopath,if he proves that homeopathy works……….Ref:James Randi
Dear Sir,
It’s not wise to say no before you know.
If you’re seriously interested to know about Homeopathy, I shall be glad to give you the initiation.
Please contact me 9609909967
Take a chemistry class and get some initiation into education.
That will fix your dilution delusion.
I had seen my father treating complicated cases (left by the expert allopaths) with homoeopathy after taking complete history of the patient by giving single medicine. The prescription used to be based on fundamentals of homoeopathy and cure was sure shot. Now a days most of the homoeopathic doctors spend a few minutes with the patient, handover variety of pills, slap hefty fees  and cure is not assured. This has created a misconception in people that homoeopathy is a placebo, added to it ICMR is only for allopathy.
It seems the people who do not know or experienced the strength  of homeopathy offer frivolous comments just for name sake.
Homeopathy is one of the most refined safe and effective  theraputics that is helping millions  of patient.
Whether it will work Covid19, is to be evaluated after critical research.
The tragedy is the ICMR which control Covid research do not allow any other systems  to conduct clinical studies.
Then daying other medical system quackery is mere foolish
All critical research says homeopathy does not work. All scientists everywhere except clueless India agree.
1. ‘The principles of homeopathy contradict known chemical, physical and biological laws and persuasive scientific trials proving its effectiveness are not available.’
Russian Academy of Sciences
2. ‘Homeopathy should not be used to treat health conditions that are chronic, serious, or could become serious. People who choose homeopathy may put their health at risk if they reject or delay treatments for which there is good evidence for safety and effectiveness.’
National Health and Medical Research Council, Australia
3. ‘These products are not supported by scientific evidence.’
Health Canada
4 “Homeopathic remedies don’t meet the criteria of evidence based medicine.”
Hungarian Academy of Sciences
5. ‘The incorporation of anthroposophical and homeopathic products in the Swedish directive on medicinal products would run counter to several of the fundamental principles regarding medicinal products and evidence-based medicine.’
Swedish Academy of Sciences
6. ‘We recommend parents and caregivers not give homeopathic teething tablets and gels to children and seek advice from their healthcare professional for safe alternatives.’
US Food and Drug Administration
7. ‘There is little evidence to support homeopathy as an effective treatment for any specific condition.’
National Centre for Complementary and Integrative Health, US
8. ‘There is no good-quality evidence that homeopathy is effective as a treatment for any health condition.’
National Health Service, UK
9. ‘Homeopathic remedies perform no better than placebos, and the principles on which homeopathy is based are scientifically implausible.’
House of Commons Science and Technology Committee, UK
10. ‘Homeopathy has not definitively proven its efficacy in any specific indication or clinical situation.’
Ministry of Health, Spain
11. ‘There is a constant increase in the quantity of evidence and the conviction of the scientific community in medicine, that homeopathy should be treated as one of the unscientific methods of so-called “alternative medicine”, which proposes worthless products without scientifically proven efficacy.’
National Medical Council, Poland
12. ‘From a purely clinical perspective, the fact remains that there is no valid empirical proof of the efficacy of homeopathy (evidence-based medicine) beyond the placebo effect.’
Federaal Kenniscentrum voor de Gezondheidszorg, Belgium
1. Let us see how scientific is allopathy which is basically a fear driven technology has some use in emergency alone.
1. When a person dies we say prana or prana shakthi has gone. Which allopathy doctor explains what is prana shakthi, how does it effect the body and so on. It is like going to a cloth shop and asking the cost of a cloth and shop keeper replies that it is 200 rupees per kg. It has no meaning. You should explain in the units in which it is relevant else it is not science.
2. Normally any cardiologist says that 70 percent heart attack comes during early ours of the day during which time a person is in deep resting. For heart patients deep rest is recommended by doctors. When you ask why it is like that, Drs replies may be due to ….. Moment you say may be it is unscientific.
3. When u ask a doc whether any medicine will work same irrespective of time of the day, season , month they say yes. In alternate medicine it is clearly stated how muli eaten in the morning is good but consumed in the evening is bad, basin laddoo in summer is good and till in the winter is good, butter milk night is bad but day time is good and so on. What is amrutham at one time may become harmful in other time. A medicine which do not have this basic comment sense and knowledge is unfit to be labelled as scientific
5. It takes 10 years for any bodys kidney to get damaged. After damage come come , we will replace ur kidneys. This is unscientific. A scientific medicine detects and prevents kidney damage. That is alternate medicine. Allowing damage to and then replacing is nothing but haath ki safai or at the maximum technology
Study some basic college level biology man.
Don’t talk shakti, prana, it becomes obvious you are a completely uneducated man.
It is funny when you say this or that is unscientific, when it is obvious you have no idea what science is. Tell me, what did you study to understand how research is done?
You can keep your basin laddoo logic, you are talking like a little kid.
No “alternate” medicine, all of which is quack medicine, has any concept of what kidneys are and what they do. Forget about preventing damage, none of them ever made any discovery of any kind with regards to kidneys.
Scientific Medicine has lots of advice about what you should not do to avoid kidney damage. In fact, the only real knowledge about preventing kidney damage comes from science.
Quack medicine is a way of defrauding people like you who have low quality education and don’t understand anything.
Those who comment on homeopathy or any perticular subject mention it as a quackery alas! Are from only common medicinal system
If they come and look upon a single most difficult case treated by homeopathy in opds of Homoeopathic hospitals,you will just spelbounded. I will advice don’t propagate a priory speculations without proper scientific investigation. It’s a mater of great crisis period.
Scientific investigation is over. See post above. No spellbound results found in any study.
Results show it is no better than placebo, which is just a way of saying it does not do anything.
Those who run down on “alternative” therapies have a wonderful opportunity to study the relative effectiveness of the therapies. It does not look as if classical medicine has good enough answers. Probably the alt therapies can take this opportunity to convince doubters.
We did. They don’t work. That is why they are called “alternative”.
If studies showed they worked, they would not be called alternative.
You seem to not understand the definition itself.
I will give you scores of addresses of people who have been tested with alternate medicines. Best example is see how bill Clinton who had 4 bypass, 1 angio and highly obese and it the verge of death recovered fully with alternate medicine and life style ( based on china study, Dean ornish findings etc. ). It is available in net. Thasimiya has no curative medicine in allopathy. A 100 percent cure is available with Pancha kavya. Dr Niranjan verma of Kanchi vagbhat panchagsvya research center has all evidence with them. U can go and verify and also meer the children whom they have cured. Please remember reduction science is not the only science, observational, experimental and clinical trials are also science. There is huge amount of data based on this also. We need to open ur eyes. I myself was taught simple remedy by my grandpa that any throat pain, infection, voice loss etc. The remedy is chew two bilwa leaves with one pepper twice a day. Within two days ur throat will be cleared. I have practiced umpteen times on myself with 200 percent success
Can you understand this?
https://thelogicofscience.com/2016/02/10/5-reasons-why-anecdotes-are-totally-worthless/
china “study” is research. ornish diet is not unscientific. Homeopathy has no science behind it, it is all fake.
You can’t even spell thalassemia. Why are you even talking about it? It is genetic. Dung and urine don’t cure it. You just pulled 100% number from your bottom.
This is why I say people who follow quack medicine have no intelligence or education and talk childishly.
Western medicine with all its economic and political power has managed to subjugate and suppress anything that they don’t approve, including scientific research. I remember a paper from France in the late 1970s, submitted to Nature. The then editor sent a team to the lab to investigate the study because it showed that a solution showed a particular reaction even when the concentration of the solute was so low that there was hardly any molecule left in it. The team had the magician James Randi in it. They too couldn’t find any problem with the study, and it got published, but the “scientific” world never accepted it. Let us remember that modern science hasn’t always been willing to accept anything that goes beyond their well-defined rules. So many discoveries were ignored due to that, only to be re-discovered years later.  Perhaps, many decades later, someone will rediscover the science behind homoeopathy and then the “scientific” world will accept it.
Your memory is terrible. The paper was in 1988 by Jacques Benveniste.
It was published by Nature with caveat statement that it was not possible by science.
Randi came after it was published and made Jacques Benveniste to show it again. Benveniste could not and lost his reputation badly.
Randi did not come alone. Nature’s editor John Maddox and fraud expert Walter Stewart were also there. Jacques Benveniste failed when everyone watched. He also could not ever repeat it again. So it is obvious it was just an error in the first time and he should have checked more. 
This is why I say you alternative “doctors” are not real doctors. You cling to discredited incidents. Nothing is stopping you from repeating that experiment a dozen times in front of every one. You can’t because it was just an error and it isn’t otherwise possible. I know this myth well because I heard it a lot from Homeo quacks and checked facts.
You guys keep repeating west, west, pharma conspiracy when the truth is all you guys lack any ability to understand research.
I would say it is only homeopaths who suppress scientific thinking. No single thing in homeopathy was ever supported by science, not even one. You can’t act like that is possible if there is any truth to homeopathy at all. And homeopaths refuse to accept any science that is against their crazy doctrines they call laws.
Comment:I think homoeopathy remedies and treatment is actually right way to pro
tect COVID19.It is necessary to broughtcust about majhore remedies in Homoeopathy.
To all propagating the myth that homoeopathy is an alternative to, “Western medicine ” – homoeopathy itself is Western. This is a fact peddlers of homoeopathy never mention. Homoeopathy might have held some attraction in the 18th century when conventional medicine hadn’t progressed as much as it has today. In the 21st century however, there is no justification to cling on to this system of treatment that has been proven time and again to be a cocktail of placebo effect and mumbo jumbo.
OMG. And the doctors are quite as if it is none of their business. when quacks  mistreat the patient.Can any one file a
PIL in the ShC?
pil in the SC?
If he is quack. Then you can complain. But judge properly. With correct observations. Multinational companies can sell hell as heaven. They can change many  correct information into falsehood
You mean like Boiron, the multinational homeopathic company that promotes falsehoods?
