There is a reason India turned to Armed Forces Medical Services when it came to coronavirus
When India needed its first quarantine facility for evacuees from Wuhan escaping the novel coronavirus pandemic the country turned, once again, towards its armed forces. But unlike earlier exigencies which involved militancy, communal strife, floods, other natural or man-made disasters, this time India faced a completely different threat. This time around, it wasn’t the local military formation that was tasked to provide aid or clean up the mess created by others. The fallback option wasn’t the usual general duty soldier, but rather a service that seldom comes in the limelight.
The Armed Forces Medical Services (AFMS) moved with a soldier’s efficiency to create a quarantine facility in Manesar near Delhi to house and observe hundreds of those evacuated from infected zones. Those quarantined included 119 from the Diamond Princess cruise ship. Another facility was set up simultaneously in Hindon, near Ghaziabad. These have looked after hundreds of cases, in batches, in facilities that were set up on a war footing, and sustained entirely from the military’s budget. Manesar facility is being run by about 60 trained medical personnel.
With roughly 7,000 specialists and super specialists spread across India, and over 130 hospitals, military medicine is an asset that rarely comes into limelight. So when the Manesar quarantine facility came up, or others like it, AFMS staff were not hogging the airwaves or providing sound bites, but quietly doing their duties. Supported by thousands of nursing officers and more than 40,000 paramedics, AFMS is the medical backbone on which the three services have survived over the years. And this is the backbone to which India turned to when a unique medical crisis threatened from across the borders. It has stood up to the test, just as it has always aspired to.
Also read: India locks down to prevent COVID-19 spread — here are restrictions imposed in your state
More such quarantine centres have been set up, in Jodhpur, Suratgarh, Jhansi, Devlali, Kolkata, Chennai and Gorakhpur. Jaisalmer military station is hosting more than a hundred evacuees from Iran, and more are expected. It is a testament to the efficiency of military medical personnel that the Army’s first novel coronavirus positive case was not someone on duty in a quarantine centre but in an establishment in Ladakh. The Ladakh Scouts soldier tested positive on account of contact with his father who recently returned from Iran.
“He is under the best possible medical care,” said Lt Gen. (retd) CS Narayanan, a veteran neurologist told me. The care, in this case, is under the supervision of 150 GH, a specialised military hospital in Leh. “150 GH has been handling every possible medical emergency in 14 Corps area,” added Gen Narayanan. 14 Corps is responsible for the entire Ladakh region, and over the years, medical cases have included everything between combat wounds, high altitude ailments and childbirth. This is only possible because of the unique dedication of military medical personnel, soldiers and yet saviours. In India, there is no state-run medical service like the AFMS.
“The expertise, technical or manpower, available in military hospitals is incomparable to anywhere in India,” said Gen. Narayanan with confidence. This confidence is not misplaced when the military medical network is seen in the larger context of India, its size, the myriad challenges, and the limited nature of health budgeting. Which is what makes military hospitals even more remarkable, for the larger specialised facilities are on par with the most expensive and posh private sector establishments. Other than the various AIIMS hospitals set up limitedly across India, there is no state-run medical service that can match what the military has managed. This, however, comes at a price.
Also read: Military’s isolation camps on standby, Army ready to deploy facilities to fight COVID-19
Even as India falls back upon AFMS to manage these facilities, provide all manpower and other requirements, this expenditure comes from the already allocated annual defence budget. Running the Manesar facility alone costs around Rs 3.5 lakh every day. There may be a reimbursement, but there might not be either. In which case, the armed forces will have to shed some requirement somewhere. There will not be, however, any whining, and the secret to this is a unique combination of the Act (Army, Navy or Air Force as the case may be) and the medical oath.
The author is a Congress leader and Editor-in-Chief of Defence & Security Alert. Views are personal.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
if by all means of comments with respect to services in totality of armed forces are good,  why does politicians say that duty of the Armed Forces is to protect borders,  they should not ask for more emoulments when youth is uneducated.
This hypocrisy…
The military Fertanity is always first to serve the nation in all condition. We all citizens praise them and ready to stand with them always. The brave officers and men are always known for their dedication and discipline. We proud on our forces. May Allah bless them success in every endeavor.
Yes and there is also Military Nursing Service. So silently work and keep working with the motto to serve with smile and do a expendable work who are silent heroes. Kudos to AFMS team.
There is an issue with pay disparity of Military Nursing Officers also. Military Nurses are paid lesser than officers of other arms of the military. This was a dirty game played by no outsider but military doctors. If military doctors deserve DACP then military nurses atleast deserve pay equal to their peers in other arms. In house cleaning and introspection in required.
At this juncture, PM Modi should be praised for his acts whatever he is doing for the shake of country men is selfless,on account of AFMS as a veteran I feel he should recalled all Doctors & paramedics to join the noble cause of AFMS to serve the nation voluntarily !
The induction of AFMC staff to manage the pendamic situation is a wise thing.  Besides all others Corps service to support AFMC ‘s involvement is laudable.  At the same time it is also right time to think of the due amenities to be ensurered for them.
Without wishing to debate whether the Military in India is the easiest scapegoat or wonder if my applause on 22 Mar went (at least to some) of those civilian doctors who might have ducked at the first sign of danger, I’ll confine to wondering whether to be more proud of the Military as an institution or ashamed at the overall capacity of mainstream India, the latter being the very inspiration of the military.
Their nothing to be ashamed military is built to fight thinking is over right now correct use of military is to use it wherever possible. After government is spending huge part of gdp on it.
Mr Raka,
The Armed Forces know what to do. Don’t worry.
You can count your pennies.
Raka ji may i knw  ur profession  and ur contribution to the nation so far. Pl rep
Instead of going ga ga everytime we (I am a veteran) do something efficiently and effectively, try and understand why we tick and then emulate our ways. 1st, we are not workers but professionals who are proud of our profession. 2nd, money doesn’t matter too much. There are a few black sheep, but not too common. 3rd, we are accountable for everything we do or we don’t. I am aware that 24X7 I am being watched by my subordinates, peers and superiors. And many more such points which need to listed and emulated.
All our doctors are CLASS.
Since when have the AFMS become the backbone of the Army? I thought the fighting arms were given this honour in the past.
Shekhar Gupta, do you know Regimental Medical Officers (RMOs)  are second to none in serving the country.  They have also served for longer terms on Siachen than infantry officers. Officers and men of the Army Medical Corps have won many gallantry awards. They form the backbone of the Armed Forces Medical Services, which you have praised so much.
It’s heartening to read the article written by a politician. But for the knowledge of the readers the same Armed Forces Doctors are not in receipt of Dynamic Assured Carrier Progression  (DACP) which is given to all central government Doctors. This means Armed Forces Doctors are lowest paid in terms of grade pay from their other counterparts and are lowest in status when compared to others as Grade pay  is the benchmark for their status. Despite the AFT verdict to provide them DACP, the same Government has gone to court that they cannot provide them DACP. So the author who is politician should bring this out for knowledge of public and stop their false Jingoism
