Modi got all the credit for lockdown. Now, he wants states to share risk of unlocking India
All politicians are riding a tiger right now during the coronavirus pandemic lockdown – from US President Donald Trump to Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
Having won accolades for the bold, timely decision of imposing a nationwide lockdown on 24 March to fight the coronavirus crisis, Modi knows that both the extension and the easing of the lockdown now will only bring diminishing political returns. The first lockdown announcement in March, through the address to the nation, was the poetry of politics. In May, however, both its extension and lifting are ensnared in prose — in the fine print of government notifications, orders and guidelines. As many as 3,940 of them, from both the Centre and the states, at last count.
So, the decision now is to let the states figure out when and where to lift the lockdown in a phased manner. You can either look at it as evidence of Modi’s belief in India’s federal system or his unquestionable political instincts.
Now, a smart politician like Modi wouldn’t want to lose the initial surge in ratings during the greatest health and economic crisis. What’s more prudent for him is to know when to leave the podium, or get off the tiger.
If PM Modi is seen to preside over a national lockdown too long, he knows that credit will slowly get diluted with inconvenient questions about implementation, testing, hospital beds, curve flattening, economic damage, hunger and unemployment.
Also read: Situation normal, but all locked up: How Modi govt has risked incapacitating India
The Centre “lets states reorder zones”, said The Indian Express front page Saturday. It is now up to the states to draw a roadmap of a phased lifting of restrictions – by sector and coloured zones.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
This is not to say that these are purely political decisions. But these decisions have health and economic fallout, so they have political costs too. And a 24×7 consummate politician like Modi wouldn’t be unaware of this.
Modi is still ruling the popularity surveys, something that home minister Amit Shah flaunted in the middle of a pandemic in a tweet. It was, of course, less cringey than US President Donald Trump tweeting his own approval ratings. Either way, as Asim Ali and Ankita Barthwal wrote in ThePrint, the BJP hasn’t suspended its politics during the biggest public health emergency in the past century. Undoubtedly, political considerations will underline how these decisions are taken and executed.
Also read: Covid lockdown has ended only opposition politics in India. BJP’s shop is very much open
In the United States, Donald Trump is weighing these political risks too. Only he is less cautious than Modi. Showing growing impatience to re-open America, Trump even warned: “If some states refuse to open, I would like to see that person run for election.”
This was the most public admission of a definite political cost of the lockdown. But lifting a lockdown in a hurry isn’t less risky either. Calibrating the unlocking is crucial. If you get the timing and sequence wrong, then bad politics awaits you.
A public poll in France in the last week of April showed that support for strict lockdown had dropped below 50 per cent for the first time.
Most Americans support continuing the lockdown, and are largely opposed to those who protest it. In recent days, some ‘internet subcultures’ consisting of gun-advocates and anti-vaxxers are starting to oppose the lockdown on the grounds of freedom, the favourite American template. In California, mayors are even clashing publicly with governors on whether to lift the lockdown or not.
The popularity ratings of Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro, Britain’s Boris Johnson and Italy’s Giuseppe Conte have also soared during the pandemic.
If Modi cedes the decisions for the remaining lockdown period and tweaking of restrictions to state chief ministers, he would come out like a national leader who acted early enough, showed the way and then left it to others to carry on, in true federal spirit.
After the initial lockdown speech, Modi has been appearing more federal and consultative in his subsequent announcements.
This could be part of his exit strategy, to spread out the risks. Of course, Modi’s supporters will say that his critics have a problem both when he centralises decisions and when he leaves it to the states. But the point here is the timing. The decision to re-open India is fraught with political risks, and hence that gets shared.
Also read: Coronavirus has brought India’s almighty Centre back, and Modi’s unlikely to give up control
Can the chief ministers afford to lift all restrictions or will they be extra-cautious? The impatience with which they (Arvind Kejriwal, Uddhav Thackeray, K. Chandrasekhar Rao) want to push out migrant workers from their borders and are digging trenches to prevent movement (Manohar Lal Khattar) indicate they will err on the side of caution and won’t lift lockdown in any tearing hurry. Especially since returning migrants are testing positive and green zones are decreasing in many states.
“The number of Covid-19 hotspot districts in India has come down to 129 from 170 a fortnight ago, but in the same period, the number of infection-free districts or green zones too decreased from 325 to 307,” said India Today on 30 April.
Tamil Nadu has only one coronavirus-free green zone.
As the Modi-led central government issues some guidelines for easing the lockdown, the fine print is in the coloured zones in the states and in the cautious decisions that chief ministers will have to take. But states may find their hands tied.
Punjab chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh told India Today Saturday that states should be empowered to draw up their own coloured zones, and not a bureaucrat in the Union health ministry.
If it works Modi can claim credit, if not, shift the blame to the states and the chief ministers.
Views are personal.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
What is today in fashion . You can easily apply whatever shit you can think in your mind on others . This is not journalism . Modi is trying to protect this nation. And being a journalist you should ne knowing that its not a single person who make decisions . Its all team working together . I don’t know why you have used such title it may be that you are getting paid good for such deeds . But this not journalism. And stop being such hypocrite. The decision of lockdown was taken by all. And the decision of unlocking was done by all . So please stop spreading the filthy thoughts of you’re mind .
The moderators of The Print should remove this post from a man claiming to collect funds to help the poor.
This would be wrong to say that Modi want credit for lockdown, he is the head of the country’s executive and a leader of ruling party his responsibility is much more then others. This is the public who support him in the interest of nation and self both. The world powerful countries failed to deal with Corona virus but we Indian have controlled over it and break the chain of community spreading.
How long the chain of community spreading will remain broken after the lifting of lockdown is the question and the answer is to be given by the state CMs and not the PM. This is eating the cake and having it too.
Due to this mentality covid has reached so far in India. Many of them don’t want to support the system wholeheartedly just because they want to oppose Modi’s move in everything.  why not the credit should be given to Modiji. due to his mass appeal, people listen at least.  Kejariwal had announced his government was fully prepared to tackle the situation, but the very next day there was a huge fiasco when he opened for liquor. should he be given the credit? states are behaving very selfish way to deal with the situation. state govt should be more sensible for dealing with the migrant worker, not just hurry to take credit to appease a segment of people. if states were wished they could have retained the migrated workers. but they thought otherwise. I think don’t politicize the government moves this way or Rahul Baba’s way that would be much better. you are just implanting this thought in others mind also whoever not thinking this way.
RAMA LAXMI
Name is as Indian as it gets, but the thought process is very Pakistani.
This is  the problem with bhakts  (AND Pakistanis too)…. neither side have the  maturity to  consider an opinion in a matured fashion
Mr Motabhai:  Care to explain why Ms Rama Laxmi’s thought process is “Pakistani” and your own “thinking” – to the extent your puerile rants can be called “thinking” – are necessarily “Indian” ?  
And then what exactly are “Pakistani” and “Indian” thinking? Is there such a thing as a Bangladeshi way of thinking? A Burmese way+ A Japanese way? A Maldivian way ?  Care to elaborate  Sir ?
Well asked.  However, the thinking appears that blind acceptance of present dispensation is Indian and any dissent or protest is Pakistani.
Mr. Manmohan Singh would have done a far better job than Modi. Without thinking of Migrant workers, he first announced a Janta Curfew on 22nd March for a day and then gave 4 hours in the evening for a complete lockdown. What credit does this man deserve in making the lives of the poor miserable. Had it not been for voluntary NGOs, individuals and organisations, there would have been deaths due to hunger on large scale. If anyone should get credit than these people who rose to the occasion should get it doctors, nurses, health workers, police and municipal authorities. What did Modi do except banging thali, tali and lighting torch and this rubbish media is telling us he is getting credit. For what.
Now, now! Stop being highly anti national.
As a journalist and an op-ed writer myself, I don’t allow bias to drive me. I actually used to think how “The Print” was one digital newspaper which remained unbiased, but looking at a lot of your posts favoring Rahul Gandhi, while at the same time bashing Modi, I swear, you have certainly failed me. It’s a shame to journalism.
If you are an Op-ed writer yourself, you should know that the words at the bottom of the piece, “Views are personal”, have a MEANING.  But it seems you don’t know what tehy mean…these are not The Print’s views, it is but the OPINION of the writer. A writer like yourself. 
You are welcome.
Mr Utkarsh Mehta: I find it hard to believe that you are a journalist and op-ed writer given the fact that you are yourself biased against Rahul and positively inclined towards Modi. After all, you don’t produce any evidence to the effect that you wrote articles against the stances adopted by virulently pro Hindutva outlets like Arnab Goswamis Republic TV, Zee TV, Swarajyamag, the RSS Organiser and so forth. 
I will not pass a judgement on whether you Sir are a shame to journalism.
Hi Rama Lakshmi,
Cheaper way of promoting your brand….this is called Media Prostitution…might be one idiot Sameer who had replied…it’s because of these type of idiots you people survive.
It’s mostly minor religion and outcome of those people product like you are deviating people…please remember same situation occured in Germany.  Where Jews tried to outsmart Germans result is Nazisim.
You can always go to Bangladesh, Pakistan…when you want to have freedom…they will teach you what is liberty..you filth…
Most of the muslims residing in India are not origin…when Mecca/ Medina clergy they have declared to take care….these people are scum…this is because of ignorance lack of proper education…
I think is being Promoted by Muslims that’s why they write sick readables…these type of sick people should be sickled.
It would have been better if states would have been asked to go for closure as required at first as all states were not affected and central govt help the states and also take steps to contained the spread from people coming from abroad instead of a national closure.help the unaffected states to maintain the economic growth of the nation and help the affected states to fight the disease.
Abhimanyu know the entry but don’t know how to exit. It would have been better if states would have been asked to go for lockdown as required at first as all states were not affected and central govt help the states and also take steps to contained the spread from travellers coming from abroad instead of a national lockdown.help the unaffected states to maintain the economic growth of the nation and help the affected states to fight the virus.
Just reading through alot of these comments I noticed a few things:
1)”Views are personal.” Very few noticed this line at the bottom. Which clears up why the article leans towards a more baised opinion. Personally a journalist should not write in a newspaper with bais and pull a line to separate themselves out from responsibility as people should do their due diligence. 
2) All news will have some bias so be pro- whatever you are but be observant and critical enough to recognize the facts reported versus opinion. As there are truths to each sides of the story. 
3) Some people have noticed and critising doing research on lockdown who is responsible, from the veiws of health organization and other news Channels the Prime minister or President will be the fall guy for bad and good. Whether certain states made decisions prior in the end the head of the government needed to make the decision so all were enforced and spread was contained. Poor states would have remained open due to fear for jobs and economic status. 
4)On that same note, As the spread and lockdown have been handle and maintained differently and with different circumstances density, movement and so, it would make more sense that the states who are closer to the situation to make a decision on it being safe. You can’t expect a leader in charge of a large country to sit and review each city for phased out lift on a ban…he would delegate this as he should and that is where the state level comes in.
Kerala leads the way and it’s time India follows the Kerala model. The cowherds states are way behind.  It has been a learning curve for Kerala as it focus is now on relying less on other states. There is again a revolution of agriculture happening and other areas, that’s bad news for other states as Kerala is a very high consumption state.  Middle east relationship with Kerala is mutually beneficial a fact the Arabs would always reinstate.
I left looking at traditional Newspapers & their website because i felt they publish article just to attract traffic.
When i came across “the  print” atleast i was happy to see unbiased & more importantly genuine news that public should now.
However my views on this channel ” the print” should change now as i feel they too want traffic and will publish ridiculous article in this objective.
Not sure if Shekar Gupta can see this, but if you can then below is for.
I had a humble respect for this channel unfortunately i am loosing it.  There might be several others like me.
At least i was expecting article not politically biased.
If anybody feels there are ways to deal corona virus then they must reach to their local/state or central administrative bodies to help.
Writing article and that too targeting leaders is of  no use now. 
Hope my opinion was well understood.
The country needs ideas not article.
Mr Sourav Tripathy: Care explaining what is ridiculous about the aticle?  It is easy to throw labels at an  article or a media platform like the Print without bothering to explain what the flaw in the article is.
Fact is Mr Tripathy, Indian media, at least 99% of it is in the business of paid news and seldom writes articles critical of the BJP and PM Modi. Media houses depend on ad revenue from the GOI and more importantly, they fear retaliation from the GOI should they run afoul of powerful figures in the government. That fact was driven home during the Emergency  that PM Indira Gandhi imposed from 1975 to 1977 when press freedoms suffered and journalists were imprisoned and threatened.  You have exactly the same effect now under the BJP government. After all, “History repeats itself”.
Also, please do not forget that Arnab Goswami, Zee TV and so on produce enough hot air for people who do not like The Print. 
The country needs a plethora of viewpoints and this article is one of them.
The government whether it is state or central is in no mood to hear anything from anyone, the top bureaucrats are the kings.  And they have a golden chance to loot the already dying common man of India, the Hindus.
Well, isn’t that an intuitive and accepted strategy world over? Several multi-national companies put the diktat in early days of pandemic to work-from-home for all offices world-wide, but are leaving quite some decisions of relaxing it on local office-heads, BECAUSE the local offices know better. Is it so difficult to understand?
Well, on the similar lines of your article, it would be much easier for me to claim that you have some political motives behind publishing such a frivolous story. It is either like common people having gup-shup over chai at a gully corner or an ulterior motive driving such an unbalanced article. Both of which lets down your sincere readers. I guess chief editor is not able to work 100 percent in these tough times (wink) . 
It would be better for the heads of the print house, to leave  such conspiracy theorists out from the race of becoming sensational and balanced view journalists. A balanced article would always delve into possible alternate strategies before claiming a political motive, which unfortunately is dearly missing here. I wish more prudence to the publishers.
Allowing this to appear shows unbiased stand…!
Sir mera naam Rajat Arora hai mobile no- 9654492714 aur main private company mein kaam karta hun. Company name Intellect design arena Ltd., 249, Phase IV, Udyog Vihar, Sector 18, Gurugram, Haryana 122001. Sir hamare manager ne salary dene se mana kar diya hai aur hume mail bhijwadi 16 April ko ki process ramp down ho gaya hai because of less call flow. Hum bata India ke liye kaam karte hai. Iske liye hum manager se follow up kar rahe hai lekin koi proper response nahi de rahe. Sir agar salary nahi milegi then how we can survive. Hamare process mein 30 35 employees hai sirf salary 13 14 ko milegi baaki ko nahi. Sir hum apni marzi se thoda ghar pe baithe hai. Wo bhi ghar pe hai hum sab bhi to hume salary kyun nahi milegi. Aasha karta hun positive response milega Aap ki sarkaar se itni mushkil gadi mein.
Well, isn’t that an intuitive and accepted strategy world over? Several multi-national companies put the diktat in early days of pandemic to work-from-home for all offices world-wide, but are leaving quite some decisions of relaxing it on local office-heads, BECAUSE the local offices know better. Is it so difficult to understand?
Well, on the similar lines of your article, it would be much easier for me to claim that you have some political motives behind publishing such a frivolous story. It is either like common people having gup-shup over chai at a gully corner or an ulterior motive driving such an unbalanced article. Both of which lets down your sincere readers. I guess chief editor is not able to work 100% in these tough times ;-). 
It would be better for the heads of the print house, to leave  such conspiracy theorists out from the race of becoming sensational and balanced view journalists. A balanced article would always delve into possible alternate strategies before claiming a political motive, which unfortunately is dearly missing here. I wish more prudence to the publishers.
Your article is based on wrong facts and illogical.
Wrong fact – Kerala imposed lockdown before central announcement. So it’s not as if Modi wanted to take credit.
Illogical thinking in your article – All over the world, a leader is known to *take credit* for *relaxing* the lockdown, be it the US, Australia etc., and avoid taking blame for imposing a lockdown. But according to the unbelievably illogical assumption of the writer, Modi wants credit for the lockdown. People lost money due to the lockdown and will get wages and money for lifting the lockdown. If anything, Modi is allowing the CMs to take credit for easing the lockdown and helping wage earners return to their jobs. 
Lockdowns are unpopular. Modi took responsibility for it.
Easing a lockdown is popular. Look at any other country. Yet the PM is allowing CMs to take credit.
You guys at The Print don’t get it, do you?
LOL, What the Modi’s media did? By locking India, India escaped the fate of Italy, Spain and US, got it.It is how Modi took the credit for the lock down.  Now people are beginning to lose their patience on lock down and want relaxation. But, without any preparedness on health infrastructure, relaxing means nothing but suicidal.  Modi understanding well about this, now try to escape from the consequences of lock down which is definitely going to create an Italy in India. So, the article is well researched one. Kudos….
When states didnt care about how to impose lockdown, then why should he bear all the brunt of sacking the lockdown. States are always good at blaming it on Central. You ! Stop Ranting like an Aunt ! Focus on Masjid Gatherings and the Corona multiplication from there.
You are more than correct. And one more suggestion , let India works on controlling POPULATION……That will automatically solve …Rather eradicate manu of the problems for our country….Our nation.
When states didnt care about how to impose lockdown, then why should he bear all the brunt of sacking the lockdown. States are always good at blaming it on Central. You ! Stop Ranting like an Aunt ! Focus on Masjid Gatherings.
Your mind is so( filthy )that all you see around you is( fìlth)
This is clearly a biased piece and one doesn’t have to be a rocket scientist to figure that. The irony is – the same moron would have written an article criticizing Modi if he kept the reins of opening the lock down with center. As they say, one a loser always a loser and once a negative always a negative. “The Print” – please think beyond politics – please understand something critical that even if the states fail despite handing the control in their hands, Modi will still be demonized for relinquishing control. Go figure.
Quite true. If Modi had allowed CMs to impose lockdown . Then they would have written, the PM is passing the buck to the CMs so that the CMs will have to take the blame for imposing a lockdown.
And if Modi unilaterally decided to relax the lockdown, The Print will say,  Modi is taking credit for lifting the lockdown.
Either way, Modi is the fall guy.
This is clearly a biased piece and one doesn’t have to be a rocket scientist to figure that. The irony is – the same moron would have written an article criticizing Modi if he kept the reins of opening the lock down with center. As they say, one a loser always a loser and once a negative always a negative. “The Print” – please think beyond politics – please understand something critical that even if the states fail despite handing the control in their hands, Modi will still be demonized for relinquishing control. Go figure.
This media house is really pessimistic and seems like has some problem with anything good in the country…
You guys are no less than bullshit. Modi is being appraised all over the world for timely good decisions. He is the boss and will remain. We are lucky to have in power at this time.
Mr. Manmohan Singh would have done a far better job than Modi. Without thinking of Migrant workers, he first announced a Janta Curfew on 22nd March for a day and then gave 4 hours in the evening for a complete lockdown. What credit does this man deserve in making the lives of the poor miserable. Had it not been for voluntary NGOs, individuals and organisations, there would have been deaths due to hunger on large scale. If anyone should get credit than these people who rose to the occasion should get it, doctors, nurses, health workers, police and municipal authorities. What did Modi do except banging thali, tali and lighting torch and this rubbish media is telling us he is getting credit. For what?
We can’t blame Modi for that. Every state level politician has the opportunity to disprove him. But except for a Pinarayi every one wants to play along, hoping to shift the blame at the right time, but I don’t think they can. So let’s hope this pandemic ravages and blows over. The saddest part has been that we did not see much of Leadership or Administrative chops in all politicians from Modi downwards except a Pinarayi, Biju Patnayak or may be a Udhav Thackeray. Rest all politicians have been absolute disaster as Leaders.
Third rated paper is The Print
Why to worry take 2 sip of Gau mutra daily and one  spoon of Gobar and coronavirus will be knockout in front of u.
The Doom of the Indian COVID
The Indian nation is doomed – forever – and they have no clue -but they deserve it. dindooo hindoo
Doom No.1
There are 10 million Indians,who clean toilets in the GCC/UK/EU/USA/Africa – and their employers,WILL kick them out.They are already laid off.
Their host nations want them to be kicked out – as the host nations want these virus holes,OUT – and they also want to lower their burden on the health and other infra of their nation.GCC imports almost all the food – and,if the logistics supply chain is hit,in wave 2 or 3 – there will be a disaster.The Arabs do not want,to feed the kaffirs.
These 10 million crap holes – WILL return to India – as the cost of living in India,is cheaper – BUT the Indian state,does NOT want them.They are infected,useless,a deadweight and the Indian state,has to quarantine these 10 million vermin.In addition,they have to be airlifed,free of cost !
Where will the Indian state keep these 10 million – who may be asymptos – and how can you test,so many vermin – and where will they be quarantined ? Will they be tested before airlift – and then,will the host nation – keep them ?
Doom No.2 
The Indian clowns,are doing 30000 tests a day – in a nation of 1.2 billion ! These are the PCR tests,for the RNA – we hope.Y ? The PRC 1st leaked the virus and then the PRC did not supply the testing kits to the Indians ! The truth is that the pathetic nation of India – has no testing kits for mass testing – not even the anti-body kits.
What will be the fate of this pathetic nation – if there is a bio terror attack ?
The Indian state lies that the tests are done,for relevant cases – the truth is that they do not have testing capacity.The PRC plan,is the “thousand cuts” – path.The purpose of denying testing kits – is to allow the spread of the virus – across the Indian Nation – for the resurgence, of the 2nd and 3 rd wave,in India,in the monsoons and beyond – and complete destruction of the Indian Banking and Industry.
No mass testing or survey tests,have been done,by the Indian state !
Doom No.3
In India – at least 30000 Indian worms,die in a day.Why is the death rate of COVID in India,less than 100 ? The scam of the billenium.No Indian is dying,in the normal course due – which is accelerated,or catalysed by COVID ?
Could it be that the diseased and aged – who are dying,in the 30000s – are immune to COVID ? Caramba ! The Truth is that the Indian state,HAS NOT CHECKED the dead,in morgues,to see,if they are infected.That is fine – as they are dead – but then,the 100000s infected,by the dead,are roaming free. 
In the COVID period – the normative death rate ,will in any case,spike upwards
Doom No.4
When the daily infections and kill ratio,is rising – the Indian state has opened the economy ! It is now too late ! SME are wiped out for ever. SME are the supply chain for large industry – so large industry is wiped out ! Indian large industry is dependent on imports – and the
exporter nations are shut ! Some Indian Industries are export led – and the importers are kapoot ! Those industries who sell in India – are facing  supply chain shortages,lack of purchasing power and demand,inability to offer credit – and soon,destruction of logistics !
Most important – there is no labour supply.
The State has earned Nil GST,from the Non-Oil,Power,Defense and Food sector,for the last 2 months !
So,the industry is bust – banks,will be bust – and the govtt will be bust !
Is this the time for the state to demonetise the deposits of the retail and their pensions and their PF ?
Doon No.5
Next Disaster,is Agriculture.Monsoon,will be a disaster.The Agri labour supply chain,will break down.The Agri-logistics,will collapse.The agri-labour,in the mandis – will collapse.
Impact – food shortage,food riots and food inflation.
Next step – agri-virus,2nd and 3rd wave of COVID,resurgence in Kashmir,and then ANARCHY.
The Indian state,has to see the positive side.India is over populated.The Banias as a race,deserve to die,and be destroyed.Of the rest – at least,50% can die.Only the Dalits deserve to live,as they were exploited,for 5000 years – with minimal carbon print,and ethical deviance.
Covid will lead to the partition of India,a new political ideology,freedom for Kashmir,and the mainstreaming of the MCC,Naxals and the CPI(ML) – and that is salvation.
Whenever,India was ruled by sons of dishwashers,whores,nautch girls,cabaret dancers ……..,those kings and their kingdoms,and India,was destroyed within 70 to 75 years.India became a republic in 1950 !
Have the The Print gone mad by publishing such an useless article.. Please maintain a stature and get a neutral report. You are compelling the user to unfollow you because of this unscrupulous reporting. Punjab has taken the decision of Lockdown upto 31st March on 22nd March only. Lockdown 3.0 was extended for 2 weeks much before PM announcement. You and your reporters has seriously gone mad with such type of articles. Respect your country and don’t criticize at this juncture. Even if you can’t do anything good for the country don’t make it difficult too.
Your credibility is very seriously at stake. Only the CM knows how to handle their region better now as already a lot has been done from the centre. As per the local prevailing scenarios, the local Administration can take the decision. Even a lame man can understand this situation and the so called ” The Print” is still occupied in criticising..Pathetic Reporting
I’ll block this news in google on my phone and ask my friends to do it…. Shameless, biased news… Useless articles
If there is anything that is more cringey than the Trump tweet, it is this article. What would you suggest that the PM must do, if not allocate the power to the states?
On the positive and realistic side, the states now have a chance to shine. Each state government can prove its worth. To say, giving power to the states is a win for the PM and a loss for the states, portrays more of the writers sceptic mindset than the ground situation. It can also be the case that you are implying that the states are incompetent to handle such responsibility and thus are sure to fail. In which case, you are acting as an hypocrite. 
Please, proceed with responsible journalism. This article is Grade A shieit.
I’ll ask google to stop recommending this channel….shame on such reports…hell with ur news
Hopeless. Yes truly. From a gutter crawler hack. Since not all states are in the same boat,  shouldn’t now some of the decisions be left to the states?
Very mean hearted person he is, extremely power hungry, Maharashtra coup fiasco is one of the example where CM sweared in and next had to resign.
Yes this is absolutely correct. Take the case of Delhi. We can’t put entire Delhi under Red Zone category. Delhi is the driving engine of our country. Put the hotspot regions under Red Zone  only, not all the regions. We should take lessons from South Korea. The way they implemented the lockdown, it is exemplary. Yes you can say India is a different country with challenges of  population. But we need to start looking for other solutions.
Totally malicious view.  Bull shit not worthy of garbage can.   Decentralisation is key to handling crisis of this sort once the first impact is confronted centrally.  District and Civic administration would play key role considering local effects and dimensions.  Biased and one sided views to be ignored and left to morons for their daily consumption of rotten diet.
Ya very true , also there have been shortcomings at each level from state to central.
Also this article is also very cleverly written , anyone neutral reading this would delegate all negativity towards the central gov , and all positivity towards the state governments , so thanks for one sided journalism.
Each and every Keralite behave weirdly by state example of how Kerala would have or have managed situation. These are sick and obsessed retards.
HERE ARE SOME FACTS AND TRUTHS:
:
Let us keep in mind PM-CARES fund and state’s GST money and key to 77 million tons of food stock is with center. So far central govt has provided peanuts amount of additional relief and also double count of what was already accounted totaling only 0.8% of GDP when all experts are asking resources of 5-10% of GDP and amount ranging from Rs 5 lakhs crores to Rs 10 lakhs crores considering India’s GDP is Rs 200 lakhs crores. 
Modi govt is attempting to shirk its  responsibility and insulate itself by asking states to take care of migrants and others without resources from center, asking landlords to not to take rent, asking corporations not cut salary of its staff etc. And to top it all off PM Modi’s govts is asking corona front line warriors to work without protective equipment’s, asking villages and districts to be self-sufficient during the time of pandemic. 
Now asking states to unlock India’s economy without proving any resources and virus spread test data that is essential to take decisions.
Such a biased writer& channel… typical of selective outrage.. but in democracy we need2 allow them2 whine& whimper..  ha
You still can’t judge Modi properly, He always do good for Nation. We believe in him as we are observing him almost 18 years. I don’t know why certain group of Media can’t see anything positive ? Negetivity ruin the nation and the person also. So be positive
Very well written article. Shows the true side of Modi and BJP government.
Really appreciate it.
Very well written article. Shows the true side of Modi and BJP government.
Nothing new and surprised as usual spreading negativity and hatred against a great leader and visionary PM
Shekhar Gupta is saying
One size fits for all solution for lockdown is wrong.
Modi is saying, according to states lockdown will be removed. So its under state decision.
Now thePrint’s RamaLakshmi is saying that is wrong..
Double game! huh!!
The Print always thinks like an electron, obviously modi only could have stopped the nation at once, but now the situation is different every state has different situation, so he can’t open India in one call.
You are Congress puppet.
How can you say this? Its clearly mentioned by the government that promotion of red area to green or orange is in hands of central government and declaration of red area is in hands of state government …..
Terrible views as always by the print. Majority of the states in India are under BJP. Are you suggesting that Modi wants his BJP ruled states to fail? Come on, it is a no brainer that now a single country wide formula cannot be applied. The zones are at the level of the wards and localities. You expect Modi to take decisions at this micro level…?
Modi is a great leader, stop trying to vilify him.
How much can the author fall and there is no further lower level to stoop down to.
India’s biggest mistake – MODI.
the print is really sick now
Strange article. If you had say rats in your house, first you would shut the whole house down. Then as you cleared each room you would open it. The lockdown had to be all or nothing. America in fact failed to call a national lockdown. Some stares didn’t lock down at all. So this is just practical. Close everything and then open up partially as things become clearer. Some people will see politics in everything.
Little confusing about the comments on Modi’s decision regarding lifting of covid-19 in different states by the chief ministers and wading the leadership and risk by the great leader of bharathmata India.  Footing reply is utmost necessary and required too.
Now CMs of various states get the opportunity to show their leaderships. Let’s see who can take bold and important decisions.
Good points. India govt is simply copying other countries and sitting their hands waiting for a cure.
Never read an article which shouts ‘Biased’ right from the subject line itself
As usual Print is Antimodi ..
Typical print.. typical modi bashing.. sometimes in a subtle way,.most of other times in a very intimidating way.. modi should do everything, take criticism for it but all the accolades must go to others… Seriously? You need to get a life
Hello.   Looks like the columnist just wanted to write something..
For the first lockdown, if Modi got the credit, then its his rightful due… Why deny  that…
As if you people never voiced your views against it… U tried your best… It did not work though.. we saw your game plan. Next…
Before every extension, there were calls better the state and center. Every state government. ( Atleast majority wanted the lockdown to be extended). Extension was not  not the union govt’s decision alone..
If state govt thinks its risky, all they have to do is , say that ” we will follow what the center says”. Simple. No risk..
Next.
Even while opening up the economy, the center has given rules and asked the state to implement it. They have been given freedom to be more stringent but not more lax… So again who has defined… Center or state?
Next… There are so many Central govt undertakings, which has to be governed by the center. For example domestic flights, railways, interstate services etc? Is the PM shying away from taking actions..
Yarukku ma kadule poo suthre?
Do your home work please? I suggest you read the book ” The art of thinking clearly” so that you get over your bias..
Hello.   Looks like the columnist just wanted to write something..
Before every extension, there were calls better the state and center. Every state government. ( Atleast majority wanted the lockdown to be extended). Extension was not  not the union govt’s decision alone..
If state govt thinks its risky, all they have to do is , say that ” we will follow what the center says”. Simple. No risk..
Next.
Even while opening up the economy, the center has given rules and asked the state to implement it. They have been given freedom to be more stringent but not more lax… So again who has defined… Center or state?
Next… There are so many Central govt undertakings, which has to be governed by the center. For example domestic flights, railways, interstate services etc? Is the PM shying away from taking actions..
Yarukku ma kadule poo suthre?
Do your home work please? I suggest you read the book ” The art of thinking clearly” so that you get over your bias..
katayi gadhe writer ho print wale. kis munh se sheeshe me shakal dekhte ho
Absolutely shame on you for being such an idiotic unprofessional critic… It is because of people like you that the nation suffers.. Stop criticising stupidly without proper justifications and do something productive in life… Even the title to your report is absolutely unprofessional written.. This shows you have no credibility
DEAR PRINT, ALL OF US WHO ARE CURRENTLY READING THIS KNOW THAT YOU’RE FUNDED BY THE OPPOSITION, SO YOU DON’T HAVE TO MUD SLASHING ON A PERSON WHO HAS DONE MUCH MORE TOWARDS THE WELFARE OF THE PEOPLE THAN THIS STUPID WRITER OF THIS ARTICLE EVER WILL,
AND TO WHOEVER IS READING THIS, I REQUEST ALL OF YOU TO JOIN ME TOWARDS BOYCOTTING THIS STUPID PRINT MEDIA HOUSE, NOT JUST BECAUSE OF POLITICS, BUT, AT A TIME LIKE THIS WHEN GLOBALLY INDIA IS BEING SUPPORTED AND APPLAUDED IT’S HIGHLY SHAMEFUL THAT MEDIA LIKE THIS SHOWCASE US IN SUCH A BAD LIGHT JUST LIKE THAT STUPID REPORT OF SOME USCIRF.
Rama Lakshmi is totally confused – she has no clue with what to do with Modi’s popularity. This article is a direct “Modi bashing”. If Modi is doing anything right, then also these Pseudo Liberals have a problem. That Modi is a smart politician, they have a problem. That he reads peoples’ pulses, they have a problem. That he is respecting states and allowing them to decide, they have a problem. That people of India supported Modi till now (with almost 80% approval rating), they have a problem. That Modi gets the timing right every time, with this too have a problem.
The frustration is all over the place. If your rag-tag politicians and political parties (opposition) are unable to capture the imagination of the Nation, that’s your problem.  I hope you realize that you represent a very minuscule %age of the population who are on the wrong side of the fence – from your perspective of course that’s the right side. These sponsored articles will fetch no political dividend  for the Opposition other than galvanizing more support for Modi.  Keep them coming. 2024 is already lost…so start focusing on 2029. Maybe Antonio Maino’s Grandsons may hold some hope by that time.
Modiji will never bother about details.He is good in awe and shock decisions which magnifies his ego.No  opposition parties should wake up and demand all the help from the central government.But Congress which has a chance to size the movement will do nothing.Rahulji will be packing his bags for vacation
When in March Hon’ble PM announced lockdown 1.0 opposition parties cried that PM did not prediscuss the matter with opposition leaders and state government which did not go well with federal structure. Now when he let state govt. to decide, they again cry foul.  They have nothing concrete for the country.
What about central vista project of 20,000 crores amid coronavirus crises.
BJP and Sangh parivar are expert demolition, distruction etc.  The head is naturally good in locking which he did using Corona. Now he does not want to take for unlocking as he does not want to take responsibility if things go wrong.  He is therefore passing on the buck to states.
With a name like Rama Lakshmi, I would have guessed that you might have a good steady mind but not.The  only Leader who acted as soon as he knew the dangers of Coved19,, he had a lockdown while others were thinking it was just a Flu.CM’s in all Congress help states or where they minority  wants to grab all the glory.Bulshit the next government in 2024 will be BJP don’t you forget it.You are handsomely being Paid by Congress party.
I wonder why the media sees everything from Modi and non-Modi point of view. Is the Media guilty of making “Modi” a bigger than life figure.
The media needs to reflect on its MODI fixation. This is definitely for sensationalism. What if the media were to report incidents / actions /policies as coming from Central Government / State Government /  Finance Minister / Congress Party et al……
“Modi got all the credit for lockdown…”
I don’t know what is creditworthy in that, especially for a person like Modi ji who loves to make sensational announcements without any preparation or thinking through the consequences. Like demenetization. When I was in school we used to play a game called “Statue”. I don’t know if today’s children are familiar with that sadistic pastime, but Modi ji has certainly not forgotten it. Just four hours were given for poor people before they would become “Statue”.
Now when the time has come to call it off (I don’t remember the command with which the statue was withdrawn), he wants others to take a call… lest something goes wrong!
The answer to this problem is very simple, but I’m not telling
Low iQ
Rama Laxmi is sure riding the libtard hobby horse, ‘ Evil Modi’, by painting what has been done in à rational and logical manner, to be part of ‘Plan Modi Rating’. It was the Center’s job to decide the start, extent and severity of lockdown, and the States’ job to implement it. Once the lockdown started, Modi then started formulating policies in consultation with the state governments. And so is the case of lifting the lockdown, taking the ground realities into consideration.
If acting in the spirit of federalism gets Modi popularity, then we can take comfort from the fact that the majority of people have their heads screwed right, and are thinking logically. Which cannot be said of the writer of this turdy piece, when he/ she spouts the familiar libtard phrases and vocabulary.
It’s so evident that this media is supported by ugly looking Jihadis.. may PIZZ be upon u ..
Situation is very critical. Unemployment and economic is not working. It’s not safe till the world may come out with medicine or vaccine. We cannot stop working. We have to work together with precautions. Only lockdown is no option. Some countries has adopted the policy of social distance. We must strictly follow it till the no solution. Everyone have to follow the social distance. I hope it will better work. We have not to work seen in our vegitable markets. Everyone have take a lesson from doctors, police and our CRPF already involved and paid it. No one is safe if we didn’t take precautions. Now everyone has to take the responsibility we have to strictly follow it otherwise we have to pay a huge penalty. So we aware and run this economy with social distance and always use masks .
If author doesn’t want credit to be given to Modi, she can give credit to Sonia Gandhi. Nobody would care as long as death toll due Corona is under control.
Politics has become a dangerous game now in India. Aandh bakhti rules the roost.
And commis, jihadis, naxals, maowadis, islamists, Vatican agents and rice bag converts are pouring their vitriol on Modi, trying to destroy, disintegrate and divide India on the basis of religion and caste. Get lost.
Baised article.
PM has given clear leverage to all states to implement best possible actions they want. That’s democracy. If he would have not done so, then he would have been portrayed as dictator.
I don’t get this:
Too centralized on PMO earlier and now putting it on states to get the glory! Can biased media persons make up their mind?!
There’s a simple difference here:
Seeking glory: Trump who held (and now has stopped) press conferences making himself the face of the pandemic battle.. there are chief ministers in India doing this as well.
Modi on the other hand has the scientists talk to the media. This is the way to pass reliable and scientific information. We all know Lav Agarwal today and not Modi as the face of the press meet. God forbid, if he were to face the media, the questions would have been pathetic! Our media needs to stop putting people on trial and sentencing them even when courts have announced judgements.
Our judiciary is sold out. What courts and what judgements r u talking about ?
The Print is a compitator of pappu in making jokes and propagating lies.
Look at the comments above. This article is published on the print. We will never forget this. Modi may not be appreciated by everyone but how he has handled this emergency has become a history. You see him as a politician, for us he is our PM.
Naturally know its states responsibilities to act in lifting the Lock-down in their respective states.   Rightly the Center govt has introduced the concept of color zones & left the discretion to follow as such it have given clear instruction pertaining to Red color, Green color etc.,  Now the Karnataka has come up with Purple Zone,  what it represents & why created one more zone no clarification yet.
Basically states are vicing their un happiness pertaining to restriction on Liquor & Petrol since the revenue  goes to the State Govt. Kitties.
No doubt its state govts. has to use its discretion at the maximum & ensure the lock-down release in stages.  Yes pertaining to this the state govts has to face Bouquet or Brickbat.   Definitely their decision has political impact  if the situation goes to the worst stage.
Thanks
Nagesh Rao
Idiotic media house, always publish negative news on current government,
Yes sir media especially the print. It ought to be ashamed of itself for making statements like this  It is as bad as any opp politicians.Look at the timing
Correct. Modi has told the states to decide easing of lockdown at their local level as they would be more efficient at local government level. Please have right views.
They are obviously not paid BeeJayPEE bootlickers.
May lord Krishna bless you with honesty, dear writer.
Hare Krishna hare Krishna
Krishna Krishna hare hare
Hare Rama hare Rama
Rama Rama hare hare.
Chant this mantra as often as you can. Haribol
The media  should take lead from Arnab Goswami Rhul Shiv Sankar. Navika  Kumar, Anand narasimhan, Rhul Kanwar et al. Others are all anti national
Now lock down will get all the discredit from oppo parties
That was below the belt.
