‘Understand meaning of Lakshman Rekha’ — Karnataka Police bans vehicles during lockdown
Bengaluru: If you are not an essential service provider but are found driving on the streets of Karnataka, the police will seize your vehicle.
The police department has decided to ban the use of two-wheelers and four-wheelers by the public until the lockdown period ends. The move, which aims to ensure proper implementation of the lockdown in Karnataka, has come into effect from 1 April.
“This is not an April Fool’s prank. Two/ four wheelers are banned from use till the 14th of April. We will SEIZE your vehicle if you CEASE to ignore this lockdown regulation,” said a tweet posted from the official handle of Karnataka Director General of Police Praveen Sood.
This is not an April Fool's prank. Two/ four wheelers are banned from use till the 14th of April. We will SEIZE your vehicle if you CEASE to ignore this lockdown regulation.
— DGP KARNATAKA (@DgpKarnataka) April 1, 2020

Speaking to ThePrint, Sood said the objective was to ensure the safety of people and also make them understand the real meaning of a lockdown.
“Despite numerous requests and announcements, people are still being found on the streets. We should understand the reason behind the lockdown. If they are part of essential services, nobody is going to stop them. But what is important for people to understand is this is a time of hardship, and we all need to maintain restraint to ensure we fight this virus,” he said.
Also read: Is there a risk of Modi govt using Covid-19 to curb media and freedoms or is it necessary?
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
 
Speaking about essential services, Sood said adequate arrangements have been made.
“We have allowed a sufficient number of people to deliver (essential goods) at our homes. All aggregators are allowed to service residential areas and provide food and medicines. In case you need anything, just walk down to your neighbourhood store and pick up your groceries. There is no need to worry about stocking up food as essential services will not be disrupted at all,” he added.
The ban on vehicles has been imposed in the state along with the prohibitory orders under Section 144 already in place, disallowing assembly of more than two persons on the streets.
“Please understand the meaning of Lakshman Rekha that the PM said. It is to ensure that we contain this virus by staying safe at home. This step will only help towards achieving that,” Sood said while speaking to ThePrint.
However, several people took to social media to criticise the move. Some of them also asked how they would buy grocery items or medicines if they are not allowed to venture out in their vehicles.
sounds more like april fool prank, illogical and idiotic, elders use 2 wheelers to get food/medicines , @Copsview @CPBlr not all things available close to home,let there be one police handle for messaging,else free for all,again lack of leadership visible among our senior cops
— Free-Spirit (@murthybs) April 1, 2020

Difficult to understand the sheer absurdity of the police diktat. If it one needs to get provisions / medicines not in walking distance & which are too heavy to carry home, will the cops / state provide the necessary transport? Wonder if it's been thought through properly at all
— Ramana (@CRamanaKumar) April 1, 2020

Sir please ask someone to come in Hagadur area of Whitefield Bangalore.
People are roaming out like normal day.@DCPTrEastBCP @blrcitytraffic @blrcitytraffic
Really police is not doing anything here.
— Satender Dalal (@SatenderSatte) April 1, 2020

The police, however, have an answer to this: “If anybody has an emergency, call 100, the police helpline, and they will help.”
