Special flight brings VIPs back to Pakistan from London, 400 citizens remain stranded in UK
New Delhi: A Pakistan International Airlines (PIA) flight has brought back nearly 150 ‘dignitaries’, including three family members of a Pakistani minister, from London to Islamabad even as 400 other citizens still remain stranded in the UK with no means to come home amid the coronavirus pandemic.
According to a Geo News report, the special PIA flight was arranged on 9 April to bring back the stranded VIP members. After the VIPs were accommodated in the aircraft, says the report, the remaining seats were kept empty to maintain social distancing.
“All the plugs were pulled out and special arrangements were made for that flight to take passengers from the Heathrow Airport in London to Islamabad Airport in Pakistan because family members of a minister and some other dignitaries wanted to leave London on an urgent basis,” Geo News reported, quoting sources.
The national carrier has since not flown back with any other passenger stranded in the UK. But there have been many ferry flights to Pakistan from London after 9 April to bring back people who are allegedly well-connected.
A spokesman of the Pakistan High Commission confirmed that it had passed lists of stranded passengers to the PIA and only those names were added who were recommended by Pakistan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the PIA head office.
Also read: India-Pakistan candle vigils at Wagah have now moved to Instagram in coronavirus lockdown
Pakistan had closed its airspace on 21 March due to increasing threat of the coronavirus pandemic. The country’s civil aviation authorities planned to close the airspace till 4 April but flight operations have remain terminated since.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
According to the report quoted above, many Pakistanis stranded in Britain were short-term travellers, including elderly and the sick, whose flights got cancelled due to airspace closure.
The Pakistani government has been criticised for flying empty planes back to the country when one single aircraft could have been enough to accommodate all stranded citizens.
Also read: Pakistan opens factories despite lockdown to prevent exports from crashing
