How Sonia & Rahul forced Jyotiraditya Scindia out of Congress and into BJP
Inside story of how Rahul Gandhi, Sonia Gandhi forced Jyotiraditya Scindia to dump Congress
As Jyotiraditya Scindia left the Congress to join the BJP, his friends and close associates told ThePrint that he had been “exploring” the option for the past “two months”. The Congress high command’s prevarication over his nomination to the Rajya Sabha from Madhya Pradesh was only the immediate trigger, they said. D.K. Singh reports.
India’s elite Socialism, Scindia’s non-AC Range Rover & the low income country trap
A unique brand of hypocritical, self-destructive socio-populism is India’s national ideology. It’s a game of who can look more socialist. Today, Prime Minister Narendra Modi tops everyone, writes Shekhar Gupta.
The real reason Amit Shah wants to know your mother tongue
The National Population Register (NPR) 2020 wants to know your mother tongue. In 2010, it did not. The NPR will help the government deliver development to India’s poor, or so Union Home Minister Amit Shah has been claiming. But how will knowing the mother tongue of every Indian help Amit Shah deliver the fruits of development? Read this article by Shivam Vij to know his take on the matter.
Forget coronavirus, homoeopathy can’t cure anything. It’s a placebo, at best
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Homoeopathy may be very popular in India but global experts dismiss its efficacy. An Australian review has found it ineffective, and Spain is considering a ban on it, Sandhya Ramesh reports in the wake of a government advisory suggesting homoeopathic remedies for the prevention of coronavirus.
Tirupati temple chairman credits Lord Balaji for saving Rs 1,300 cr deposited in Yes Bank
The Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) authorities withdrew gold and cash deposits worth Rs 1,300 crore, in the name of Lord Balaji, from Yes Bank just months before the Reserve Bank of India placed it under a moratorium. Speaking to Rohini Swamy, TTD chairman Y.V. Subba Reddy credited the decision to Lord Balaji.
IAS officers say no recourse left against ‘arbitrary’ appraisal system after HC upholds it
With the Delhi High Court refusing to strike down the Narendra Modi government’s 360-degree review system for senior civil servants, IAS officers feel they have no recourse left against “arbitrary” appraisals. Read this report by Sanya Dhingra to know more.
