Modi cabinet practises social distancing at meeting, Amit Shah asks, ‘Are you?’
New Delhi: In a photo posted to Twitter Wednesday, Union Home Minister Amit Shah said social distancing is need of the hour, and asked: “We are ensuring it… Are you?”
The photo, taken at Wednesday’s cabinet meeting chaired by Prime Minister Narendra Modi at 7 Lok Kalyan Marg, showed all ministers sitting spread in a room to ensure social distancing.
The large oval table that the cabinet usually sits around was gone, though small side tables were provided next to each chair.
Social distancing is need of the hour. We are ensuring it… Are you?
Picture from today’s cabinet meeting chaired by Hon’ble PM @narendramodi ji.#IndiaFightsCorona pic.twitter.com/Lr76lBgQoa
— Amit Shah (@AmitShah) March 25, 2020
PM Modi, who has addressed the nation twice on the coronavirus crises, has repeatedly talked about the need to practise social distancing to help break the coronavirus’ chain of transmission.
Modi even put in effect a nationwide lockdown for 21 days Tuesday midnight onwards, to ensure citizens stay home and limit contact with each other.
Also read: Quarantined and alone due to corona, I never felt more connected with my friends and family
The government has also taken measures to check the spread of coronavirus, enforcing work form home for most ministries. At official meetings, seating is being arranged to keep a distance between people.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
At press briefings, just two reporters are being seated in a row that usually accommodates 10-12 people.
In just the last week, India has seen its active cases surge from less than 100 to past 500. At least nine people have died, though around 40 have recovered.
The government remained functioning in full capacity until this week. Parliament sessions continued, despite repeated demands from opposition members. In both Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, members of Parliament sit in close proximity, sometimes four to five of them huddled in one row.
On 23 March, when BJP MP Dushyant Singh went into self-quarantine, the government decided to adjourn both houses sine die, 12 days before the session would officially end.
Singh and his mother, former Rajasthan chief minister Vasundhara Raje, had attended a party hosted by Bollywood singer Kanika Kapoor, who later tested positive for Covid-19.
