Ajay Maken moves NHRC to seek reservation of 70% hospital beds in Delhi for Covid patients
New Delhi: Senior Congress leader and former union minister Ajay Maken has moved the NHRC seeking directions to the Delhi government to keep ready and reserve 70 per cent of hospital beds for COVID-19 patients.
He has also said that Delhi should be opened up from the lockdown only after the COVID positivity rate in the national capital comes down to 10 per cent from the current 27 per cent.
In his petition, Maken has sought urgent intervention for protection and preservation of public life in Delhi. His petition comes after reports that COVID-19 patients are not getting admission in Delhi hospitals.
“I seek your indulgence in the unprecedented health governance crisis endangering human life in the national capital – Delhi.
“We request your good self to issue appropriate directions to the GNCTD for protection and preservation of human life in the national capital,” Maken said in his petition before the NHRC.
“As Ex-MoS Home in-charge of Human Rights department, I am going to the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) to submit an appeal seeking directions for Delhi and Union government to prepare and preserve 70 pc of Delhi bed capacity for COVID,” he also said in a tweet.
Also read: Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal undergoes Covid-19 test after mild fever, sore throat
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
In his letter to NHRC Chairperson, Justice H L Dattu, Maken has called upon the Delhi government for keeping ready 10,000 ventilators and 42,000 beds in accordance with the Dr Mahesh Verma committee report.
The committee was constituted by the Delhi government for healthcare infrastructure augmentation and strengthen overall preparedness of hospitals to battle COVID-19.
“Open Delhi only if the positivity ratio comes down from 27 to less than 10 per hundred,” Maken also said in a tweet.
The senior Congress leader had earlier said that it is premature to open up Delhi till the time adequate health facilities are put in place.
He also noted that it is extremely painful to see that only 12 per cent of the Delhi government, 8 per cent of central government institutions and 7 per cent of private hospital beds are presently occupied and used to treat COVID patients.
Moreover, in the Delhi government’s case, even around 70 per cent of dedicated beds are vacant, he said.
While on the one hand, Delhi residents are struggling hard to fetch a bed in times of the crisis, on the other, the GNCTD despite confirming availability of beds, is not providing the same to the needy and hence many families have lost their loved ones.
“Therefore, such a helpless situation is a grave violation of Article 21, Right to Life, as enshrined in the Constitution of India,” he said.
“Accordingly, we request the NHRC that appropriate directions be given to the GNCTD to ensure that those suffering from Coronavirus and in need of beds, must be given admission without any further hardship. At least, 70 pc of bed capacity should be prepared and reserved for COVID patients,” he said.
The former union minister noted that today only 8 per cent of the 57,194 beds are kept ready for COVID-19 patients.
“Tests per day have reduced by 50 per cent to 3700 – lowest since May 15. Allow asymptomatic patients to be tested,” Maken said.
Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Sunday announced that the hospitals run by the Delhi government and private entities will only treat Delhiites during the coronavirus crisis while the city’s borders will be reopened from Monday.
Lieutenant Governor Anil Baijal has overruled the AAP government’s controversial order.
