Over 1,100 activists condemn Delhi Police action against anti-CAA protestors amid lockdown
New Delhi: A group of 1,100 activists from across India have issued a statement condemning the arrests of Muslims and women activists in Delhi who were at the forefront of the protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).
Noting that these arrests were taking place at a time the country was in lockdown, activists have demanded that the Delhi Police make public the details of the FIRs, arrests and detentions with their legal status, and conduct a free and fair investigation into all the incidents of violence.
They also demanded that false cases against peaceful anti-CAA protestors be dropped, and those arrested on “trumped-up charges” be immediately released.
The signatories of the statement included social activists Medha Patkar, Aruna Roy and Teesta Setalvad, Dipa Sinha, a professor at Ambedkar University, film director Aparna Sen, celebrated authors Meena Kandasamy and Gita Hariharan, eminent lawyers Anubha Rastogi and Vasudha Nagraj.
They also included members of feminists groups such as Saheli, National Federation of Indian Women (NFIW), All India Democratic Women’s Association (AIDWA), LABIA – A Queer Feminist LBT Collective and Forum Against Oppression of Women (FAOW).
Also read: Delhi Police file first charge sheet in communal riots case, name shooter Shahrukh 
The activists demanded that action instead be taken against the “actual instigators and perpetrators of communal violence”.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“Real culprits of the violence in Delhi must be booked, including the likes of Kapil Mishra, Anurag Thakur, Parvesh Verma and others who instigated hate, sparked and perpetuated the violence,” they said.
BJP leader Kapil Mishra was in February accused of delivering hate speeches that instigated the Delhi riots during the anti-CAA protests.
The statement highlighted the cases of three Muslim women who were at the forefront of the protests. It claimed that these women were not involved in the violence in any way, contrary to the Delhi Police’s charge.
Gulfisha, who was arrested on 9 April, is a 25-year-old MBA student who took part in the Seelampur anti-CAA protests. According to the statement, Gulfisha has been languishing in judicial custody under false charges of sedition, without access to her family or a lawyer.
She had reportedly been named in an FIR in February. Gulfisha is also part of Pinjra Tod — a collective of women students and alumni of colleges from across Delhi.
The statement also noted the case of Safoora Zargar, a 30-year-old member of the Jamia Coordination Committee, who was arrested for allegedly being the key conspirator of the violence. Zargar is three months pregnant, the statement added.
The third case cited was that of Ishrat Jahan, a former municipal councillor, who has been in jail for over a month now.
In the statement, the activists alleged that Jahan, who had participated in the protests against CAA and the National Register of Citizens in East Delhi’s Khureji, has been subjected to torture in jail.
Jahan was accused of attempt to murder in a case related to the violence and rioting that tore through northeast Delhi for three days in February. He was also denied bale, the collective said.
Also read: Delhi riots neither designed by Modi govt, nor Islamic conspiracy. It’s far more dangerous
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
CAA is part of law duly passed by the Indian Parliament. If you violate the law or protest violently, action has to be taken against you. These protestors are primarily responsible for inciting Delhi riots and should be punished as per the law of the land It is so fair..
The anti-CAA protests are simply political. The amendment to the Citizenship Act is very specific and applies to a specific population that has been living in India and does not apply to any future population or takes away any rights of any person or group in India.
It is wrong to protest against a amendment that simply helps people who are refugees in this country. Especially Muslims who protest are totally wrong. They are technically refugees who could be asked to go relocate to the country they demanded and got.
Right action has been taken. More such people who created nuisance by protesting CAA should be jailed. Freedom to protest does not include propagating lies.
Shame on these activists.
Blood of 59 persons died in NE Delhi riots and loss of property to the tunes of hundreds of crores, demand apologies from these activists.
These blood suckers are sitting in their posh offices and homes, writing BS and portraying themselves as paragon of virtue.
Anti CAA protesters were being handled with kid gloves, no more.
Anti CAA protesters are absolute bigots. India should pass a law like Germany that criminalises denial of persecution of minorities in Pakistan. We all know who bank rolls these hypocritic “activists”.
Excellent work by police. Nation suffered a lot due to motivated protests to create chaos and violence and destabilise the country.
govt has no right to arrest   in a democracy   protest is allowed if govt feels they cannot protest better resign and get lost  u dont deserve to sit in power
peaceful protests are allowed in any democracy. Not VIOLENT protests
Government has got all the rights to arrest people trying to spread hate with their baseless protests creating trouble for the general public and threatening and hurting the religious sentiments of a particular community
And since this government is doing it’s job really well
We’ll elect this government again.
Your vote won’t make any difference because you already have voted against this government in last elections.
