Tablighi Jamaat was a serious security lapse. Futile to argue Hindu temples too were open
After the Shaheen Bagh anti-CAA protests, the gathering of the Tablighi Jamaat at Delhi’s Nizamuddin Markaz on 13-15 March has become a serious cause of worry amid India’s nationwide fight against the deadly Covid-19 pandemic.
What are common to both incidents is that they involve a section of the Muslim community and vested interests playing on the religious sentiments of the fellow community members. There was also a loud exhibition of stridently anti-government sentiments in Shaheen Bagh and defiance of lockdown in Markaz gathering. In both cases, the string pullers seem to have deep pockets and abundant political motive.
According to media reports, the Delhi Police was ineffective in getting the Markaz area vacated and Home Minister Amit Shah had to seek the assistance of National Security Adviser (NSA) Ajit Doval to do the police’s job. Maulana Saad, the now absconding chief of Tablighi Jamaat, which currently operates from its office at Nizamuddin in Delhi, had refused to yield to pleas from the Delhi Police to vacate the Banglewali Masjid. NSA Doval reportedly reached Markaz around 2.00 am on 29 March and convinced Saad to get the area vacated and have the members tested for Covid-19. It worked.
The government was well aware of the seriousness of the situation building up. Earlier, in another congregation at Karimnagar in Telangana, 10 Indonesian preachers travelling on tourist visas as against under the missionary category had tested positive for Covid-19, forcing the security agencies to ring the alarm bells.
Was the Markaz incident a mere law and order situation gone wrong or was it a serious security lapse? The Narendra Modi government must at some stage put these questions to rest. It is strange that the Tablighi Jamaat members who attended the gathering in Delhi were allowed to return to their respective towns without any checks or quarantine, considering the number of positive Covid-19 cases had begun to rise significantly late last month. This is a serious security lapse, which has turned into a health hazard and an invitation to an avoidable disaster.
Also read: Coronavirus was a test of secular nationalism. Then Tablighi Jamaat became the scapegoat
Meanwhile, the Covid-19 cases have suddenly gone up, with the spurt mainly attributed to those who attended the Tablighi Jamaat meet at Nizamuddin. The gathering was reportedly attended by more than 3,000 members, including about 800 foreign preachers of the Islamic organisation, which is believed to be popular in some Asian countries. One of the six core principles of Tablighi Jamaat is Dawat-o-Tabligh (proselytisation).
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The foreign preachers didn’t enter India on missionary visas, which would have limited their movement in the country to specific locations. Because they came on tourist visas, tracking their travel itinerary is extremely difficult now. This is not good news in terms of tracing people with whom they may have come in contact.
While tracing their contacts looks impossible, most of the foreign preachers themselves are yet to be traced. Intelligence Bureau (IB) director Arvind Kumar has reportedly told state DGPs to scan all Tablighi Jamaat congregations held in other parts of the country such as Karimnagar in Telangana; Malappuram (and some other towns of northern Kerala); Erode, Nagore, and Ramanathapuram in Tamil Nadu; and  a few towns in the coastal areas of Karnataka. The Union home ministry has also sought details on all such Tablighi Jamaat preachers who entered India through international airports, especially since the beginning of 2020. Even if the entire list is made available, it will be impossible to trace and scan each one of them.
Another difficulty is the animosity and opposition displayed by some irresponsible Tablighi Jamaat attendees. One police team in Bihar, which had gone to a Mosque in Madhubani to look for Jamaat attendees was reportedly attacked with stones and chased away. 
Also read: Tablighi Jamaat brought out Republic, Zee and Times Now’s fangs that Covid-19 had withdrawn
Behind this callous attitude and rebelliously defiant insubordination for safety measures and ‘social distancing’ in public interest is the mistaken belief that coronavirus will not infect a true believer and the faithful. Such appallingly misleading ideas are probably being propagated by the radical, fundamentalist preachers with awfully dated views on modern science and Covid-19 affliction whose remedy continues to elude researchers.
It is understandable that calamities drive people towards religion and push them to look for solace in religious entities. It is futile to argue that Hindu temples too were open and political meetings were taking place uninterrupted. For records, many important shrines were shut after the existing crowd was cleared well before the nationwide lockdown was announced. They didn’t wait for a fatwa or direction from some religious head. There has not been a single case of contumacious misbehaviour on the part of devotees or even the migrants who were put to extreme hardship.
The coronavirus is not known to look for religious options before afflicting. This kind of whataboutery, the old Soviet-era propaganda using the tu quoque logical fallacy, will serve no good purpose except widening the schism among communities at a time when social unity and harmony is germane in the fight against a global pandemic.
The author is a member of the National Executive Committee of the BJP and former editor of Organiser. Views are personal.
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Near the same dates a similar programme was stopped in mumbai even though it had prior permission, so it should have been stopped in Delhi too
The author mentions very little about the Hindu gatherings(including Yogi’s moving the Ram idol) which could cause an outbreak!  He is just another BJP bakht feeding stories to the masses!
@Steohen Billings:
Troll alert,
Rakeshji, you are taking this critical time to propogate christianity. You would not be thought by any one that you are so mean and silly. No hindu GOD or Prophet Mohammed or Lord jesus  tells you to hate any one or any living being. When your food plate is filled with no living beings and your mind says ENOUGH ,  and your heart and words accept your mistakes then THAT GOD is nowhere he is in you. Halva jilebi kheer gives you the sweet taste in common,but differ in name. Pure love and hatredless mind is God. Please bhai samjo.
Noble thought.
More than the Hindu or Muslim aspect of the activity, the important point was the presence of FOREIGNERS in it. If Hindu temples and congregations haven’t bred Corona, touchwood, then it can be due to the absence of foreigners there. Government should have VETOED the participation from other countries. In that regard I would put the larger share of blame on the central or Delhi government, whoever had the authority to exercise such a veto. If someone says the government WILFULLY IGNORED this dimension so the blame could fall on a “Muslim” establishment, I will buy that argument. “Give them a long enough rope to hang themselves”, sort of a thing.
Muslims are the only community today who can be enmass fooled using lies. Muslims have lost the ability to separate truth from lies and imagination from facts due Quarnic teachings. Most Indian Muslims today are raised to hate RSS from very childhood at home as well as in Madarsas.  Muslims hatred of RSS will only increase in future unless government seriously reviews the education imparted to Muslim children. Madarsas must be freed from the control of hard islamist mullahas and minority tag of Muslims must be withdrawn.  Muslims ‘ social reforms are the need of the hour and must be carried immediately.
Are you kidding me?! You seem to be living in a fool’s paradise!
Heard of the caste system?! Untouchability?! Sati?! Any society where free speech, critical thinking, and a rational approach is suppressed will foster blind belief. 
The powers that be want such a society to prevail, so that they can cling on to power. For proof, just look at yourself, Modi-bhakt!!
Dear Subin ,
We had several shortcomings in our religion like sati pratha , Bal vivah, untouchability etc. But we had forward looking people like swami dayanand Saraswati , raja ram Mohan Rai , swami Vivekananda who were progressive and forward looking and corrected all such evils. They ensured that we should study English to move forward , DAV ( Dayanand Anglo Vedic) school which is run by Arya samaj society is one such institution .  We are free and not bound by what pandit , dharm guru says. But there is sharp contrast in Muslim community , you study in madarsas where you don’t get proper mainstream education. You are governed by mullas who are basically conservative in their approach. What majority of the Muslim community is doing today ? Selling chicken,meat and eggs, doing tailoring,  making puncture, selling fruits & veg., Pulling ricshaw etc. Very few of them are engineers and doctors or IPS / IAS. If your education is not like others and there is a resistance to change by the community  then in next 10 / 15 years  you will be the most backward community of India. However today also the SC, ST is well above you people in higher study. Hence stop conservative approach and learn from others who are  growing fast.
“Muslims are the only community today who can be enmass fooled using lies…”
So, YOU are not going to light a candle on 5 April?
