Decline in India’s Covid R0 and how effective is the ‘test, test, test’ mantra
New Delhi: According to a new report, the reproduction number or R-naught (R0) of Covid-19 in India is now 1.36.
R0 indicates the number of people a patient can directly infect in a healthy population. The higher the R0, the faster an epidemic spreads. It had started with 1.7, then was estimated at 4 on 23 May and then came down to 1.3 or 1.4. The last count was 1.55, and now it is 1.36. This indicates that there has been a consistent decline in the reproduction rate.
Also read: India’s Covid-19 R0 down to 1.36 now, 25,000 cases by April-end at this rate: IMS scientist
Dr Srinath Reddy, President of the Public Health Foundation of India, in an interview with The Financial Express, said that population-wide testing is neither feasible nor advisable. Dr Reddy has formerly headed the Department of Cardiology at All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) and is a member of the executive group of the International Steering Committee of WHO’s COVID-19 Solidarity trial.
WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus had asked countries to ‘test, test and test’ to defeat Covid-19 and since then, this strategy has become popular wisdom. Dr Reddy said more tests are good, but not in isolation, and other things also matter. He pointed out the example of Bolivia and Belgium. Bolivia has only conducted 2.4 per cent of the tests conducted in Belgium, but only 34 people have died of Covid-19 in Bolivia whereas close to 6000 in Belgium. Both Belgium and Bolivia have a population of 1.16 crore.
Dr Reddy gave the example of recovered patients who have tested positive again in South Korea. False positives and negatives will cause a great deal of confusion, he added.
He suggested that India should continue with its strategy of testing suspected cases and said people with influenza-like symptoms could also be tested as testing is ramped up.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Watch the latest episode of CTC here:

Also read: Covid-19 fight is a Test match, not a T20. Here’s what India needs to do to win
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
