Army doctor and JCO test positive for Covid-19, both had travelled to Delhi separately
New Delhi: An Army doctor holding a Colonel rank posted with the Command Hospital in Kolkata, and a Junior Commissioned Officer (JCO) posted in Dehradun have tested positive for Covid-19 as the outbreak spreads through the country.
Both Army personnel don’t have any foreign travel history. However, both had visited Delhi during their leave period before returning to their respective locations earlier this month.
The latest cases have come over 10 days after an Army jawan posted in Leh tested positive for the virus to become the first victim of the disease in the 13-lakh strong force. He has successfully recovered since.
Also read: Overcrowded Agra jail releases 71 inmates accused of theft, robbery amid coronavirus scare
Army sources said the coronavirus test reports of both the Colonel and the JCO arrived Sunday. Both had shown symptoms earlier this week and were immediately quarantined according to the protocols established.
The Army doctor, a 52-year-old anesthetist with the Command Hospital, had travelled to Delhi on 10 March and returned on 17 March. He reported fever since 24 March, said sources.
The JCO had a travel history from Delhi to Jhunjhunu in Rajasthan on 25 February and from Jhunjhunu to Chakrata in Uttarakhand on 10 March. He developed fever on 21 March, said the sources.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
It was not immediately clear if the two personnel had interacted with anyone in Delhi who tested positive later.
“We are following the protocols and putting all those who came in touch with them in quarantine,” said an Army officer who didn’t wish to be named. He added that the immediate family members had been already alerted and necessary protocols issued.
The coronavirus outbreak has been a major concern for the military – Army, Air Force and Navy. The three Services have issued their respective protocols to ensure that the virus does not spread among the ranks.
The Indian military has identified 11 of its hospitals to carry out Covid-19 tests and earmarked 28 other facilities across the country to exclusively deal with the outbreak that has now infected over 1,000 people in India.
With inputs from Madhuparna Das.
Also read: Modi’s India isn’t Mao’s China. Silly forecasts assume we’ll let corona kill millions of us
