‘Tell us, what’s the strategy after 17 May?’ — Congress wants Modi govt to explain Covid plan
New Delhi: Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi Wednesday sought to know what the Narendra Modi government’s post-lockdown roadmap is and the criteria being used to judge how long it will continue, even as chief ministers of Congress-ruled states reiterated their demand for financial assistance to handle the Covid-19 pandemic.
Gandhi was speaking at a meeting of chief ministers (CMs) of the Congress-ruled states to assess how they were faring and discuss their lockdown strategy, including the status of migrant workers who were returning to their respective states.
“After May 17th, what? And after May 17th, how? What criteria is the Government of India using to judge how long the lockdown is to continue?” Congress chief spokesperson Randeep Surjewala quoted Gandhi as saying in the video conference with CMs.
The Centre had on 1 May extended the nationwide lockdown by two weeks as India works to contain the spread of the infection.
Besides Gandhi and the CMs of Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and Puducherry, the meeting was attended by senior party leaders, including former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, former finance minister P. Chidambaram and Rahul Gandhi.
Manmohan Singh demanded to know what will happen after the third extension of the lockdown ends on 17 May.
“As Soniaji has already pointed out, we need to know what will happen after lockdown 3.0,” he said, adding that CM’s need to deliberate and ask the government for a strategy.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Rahul demanded that the government immediately withdraw its decision to raise petrol and diesel prices by Rs 10-13 per litre, which he said was “unfair”, while the CMs were concerned if there would be further extensions of the lockdown.
Also read: Modi’s Covid-19 strategy has Congress party’s ‘first family’ split in its political response
Surjewala said that all the four CMs — Punjab’s Amarinder Singh, Rajasthan’s Ashok Gehlot, Chhattisgarh’s Bhupesh Baghel and Puducherry’s V. Narayanasamy — were unanimous in their view that the Centre was pushing the states towards fiscal distress by not giving additional resources to tackle Covid-19.
Addressing a media briefing, Surjewala said all four CMs will write to Prime Minister Modi again, asking for financial support. The lockdown caused massive losses across the country as industries were forced to shut down overnight while PM Modi urged employers to avoid pay cuts and lay offs.
Gehlot asked how states were expected to run without an extensive stimulus package. “We have lost Rs 10,000 crore of revenue. States have repeatedly requested the PM for a package but we are yet to hear from GOI,” he said.
Baghel also highlighted the dire economic crisis Chattisgarh has been facing because of the lockdown.
The CMs also told Gandhi that they have decided to pay for the travel of migrant labour. “The railways are charging Rs 870 per ticket, which the state is paying,” he said.
Also read: India has allocated over Rs 200 cr for new Covid-19 projects: Science secretary
In the meeting, the CMs also raised issues with the Centre deciding on hotspots in states.
Amarinder Singh said that the concern was the people making the decision were sitting in Delhi with no real knowledge of the ground reality.
The issue was also flagged by Narayanasamy, who said, “Govt of India is deciding on zones without consulting the States and this is creating an anomalous situation. People sitting in Delhi can’t tell the States, No State or CM is consulted. Why?” the Puducherry CM tweeted.
Govt of India is deciding on zones without consulting the States and this is creating anomalous situation. People sitting in Delhi can’t tell the States, No State or Chief Minister is consulted. Why?Prime Minister is not saying a word on economic package for States.
— V.Narayanasamy (@VNarayanasami) May 6, 2020

On Monday, chief secretaries of several states flagged the same issue in their meeting with the Cabinet Secretary Rajiv Gauba.
Depending on the severity of Covid-19 cases, the Union health ministry has been categorising the country’s 736 districts into red (hotspot), orange (no new cases in 14 days) and green (no new cases in 21 days) zones.
The categorisation is dynamic as it changes based on the situation. As of 1 May, India has 130 red zones while the number of active cases crossed 33,000 Wednesday morning.
Also read: Covid lockdown has ended only opposition politics in India. BJP’s shop is very much open
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
