Modi govt approves made-in-India rapid test kits after Chinese supply is delayed
New Delhi: Facing delays in the delivery of rapid testing kits from China, the Narendra Modi government has now cleared made-in-India kits, alongside those from other countries like South Korea, Germany and France.
The Indian firms approved to supply these kits are Gujarat-based Voxtur Bio, Delhi-based Vanguard Diagnostics and the government-owned HLL Lifecare.
On 4 April, India’s apex medical research body, ICMR, had approved the use of these tests in areas with a high number of Covid-19 cases (clusters), as well as those with large migration and a high number of evacuees.
Rapid antibody tests are prick-based tests that can detect the presence of coronavirus antibodies. They provide quick results and don’t need to be conducted in laboratories.
The government had placed an order for seven lakh kits with Chinese firms, which were supposed to deliver the consignment by 8 April. Overall, ICMR has invited bids for 45 lakh testing kits.
“There is a shortage of cargo planes due to which kits are stuck at ports. Basically, companies are facing logistics issues,” said G.S.K. Velu, chairman and managing director of Chennai-based Trivitron Healthcare, which imports kits from Chinese manufacturers.
“We had placed orders for testing kits from our supplier in China and currently they are facing delays in executing orders. I hope to get them by this week or next,” Velu said.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The delay in deliveries from China is leading to the postponement of the testing drive, which is critical at this juncture when India has crossed 10,000 Covid-19 cases.
Also read: Rajasthan has done 30,000 tests, a reason why it could see more cases: Top health official
 
Apart from the Indian firms, the ICMR and Drug Controller General of India Tuesday approved new testing kit manufacturers from Korea, Germany and France, as well as more Chinese firms.
According to the 8 April list of approved manufacturers, 33 suppliers were approved — 31 Chinese firms, one Korean firm and one from Israel.
In the latest list, dated 14 April, 51 manufacturers have been approved, of which 40 are Chinese, five Korean, one French, one German, one Israeli and three Indian firms.
A rapid antibody test shows if a person once infected by the coronavirus has developed immunity to it.
The human body develops two kinds of antibodies — immunoglobulin M (IgM) and immunoglobulin G (IgG). These antibodies remain in the body from between a month to a year, or even longer in some cases.
The IgM antibody arrives within five to seven days of acquiring the infection, whereas IgG arrives later, when the person has recovered. When a person is IgG-positive, it means that the person has been exposed to the infection and their body has developed the immune response.
These tests are relatively cheap compared to the RT-PCR test, which is currently the standard Covid-19 test being carried out in the country. It costs Rs 4,500 to get an RT-PCR test done in a private lab. A rapid antibody test, meanwhile, costs approximately Rs 300.
Also read: ICMR advises ‘pool testing’ in low-infection areas to increase number of Covid-19 tests
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Belance inquare
Abhi to chines saman se Toba karo kis liye yeh polition kuchh fiyede ke liye  Indian ki jaan ke sath khel rahe ho  yeh kit to kafi samay pehle hi approved Kar Deni chahiye thi
