‘Do the five’: Health ministry advisory on coronavirus pops up on Google search
New Delhi: The internet has become even more of a lifeline to people in the time of coronavirus — those practicing social distancing as well as those in quarantine. And starting Thursday morning, anyone who begins a Google search through web browsers such as Google Chrome, Safari and Mozilla Firefox can see a small pop-up icon with a hand symbol and accompanying text stating: ‘DO THE FIVE. Help Stop Coronavirus.’
The icon can appear on a ‘new tab’ or when one opens www.google.com to begin a search. It has also been appearing on some mobile phones.
The measure seems to have been taken by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, because upon clicking the hand icon, a public service announcement opens up. A click on the page redirects the user to the health ministry’s website.
The announcement lists five things that can help stop the spread of the coronavirus. The five steps are: “HANDS: Wash them often”, “ELBOW: Cough into it”, “FACE: Don’t touch it”, “SPACE: Keep safe distance”, and “FEEL sick? Stay home”.
The health ministry’s website, which is especially dedicated to COVID-19 provides
information regarding helplines, advisory on social distancing, guidelines on dead body management, the total number of coronavirus cases, among other details.
ThePrint’s attempts to reach the health ministry for a comment on this measure did not elicit a response. This report will be updated when it responds.
Also read: No new cases in China to clean Venice waters — the latest on COVID-19
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
According to the ministry, the total number of reported cases of COVID-19 in India is 141, but news reports note that the number is 166. India had its third coronavirus casualty Tuesday, when a 64-year-old man died at Mumbai’s Kasturba Hospital. The deceased had returned from Dubai and suffered from multiple heart issues.
With the number of cases rising, many state governments have ordered the closure of schools and colleges, and have also shut down gyms, spas and nightclubs until 31 March.
The Delhi government has also restricted public gatherings of more than 50 people, barring weddings.
The Class 10 and 12 board examinations of both the CBSE and ICSE have been postponed until 31 March.
Also read: Schools shut over COVID-19, govt plans delivery of grains or cash for mid-day meal recipients
