Curb on liquor sale: BJP-RSS conservatism or has medical reasons?
The liquor lobby in India has demanded that states allow the sale of alcohol outside the containment zones with strict social distancing guidelines in place. In a sign that even states want sales to resume, Punjab chief minister Amarinder Singh requested the Modi government to lift the ban. But the Home Ministry has asserted that liquor shops will stay shut. States generate a big chunk in revenues from taxing liquor and the corona crisis has left them cash-strapped.
ThePrint: Curb on liquor sale: BJP-RSS conservatism or has medical reasons?
Swadesh Singh
Assistant professor, Delhi University
In normal times, we have seen long queues in front of the liquor shops in different cities ranging from metros to tier-III cities. People buy from these shops and many consume the alcohol right outside them. On most occasions, the local police have found it difficult to disperse them. These people, in their inebriated condition, also get involved in scuffling and violence with police and other people for no definite reason. This leads to unnecessary chaos and sometimes, the authorities find it difficult to manage such a situation. Incidents of drunk driving, accidents, and domestic violence have a close connection with liquor sales. Local thekas in smaller cities, towns and villages only add to the problem.
At present, the country is fighting an unknown enemy. States are definitely facing losses from excise duty but they should not come under the pressure of any liquor lobby to open wine shops. Opening them will only increase the chances of people getting affected by the coronavirus. This will cause insurmountable damage to the benefits accrued through the Covid-19 lockdown. It will burden the police, doctors and sanitation workers with additional work. If the government allows liquor shops to be opened in metro cities, then all the shopkeepers will demand the same for their shops, both in rural and urban centres. We should analyse this situation holistically and not look at it from the prism of metro cities only.
Indranil Mukhopadhyay
Associate Professor, Jindal School of Government and Public Policy and member, Jan Swasthya Abhiyan
Alcohol consumption should not be debated through a moral lens but rather as a public health concern. Existing evidence indicates that any consumption of alcohol, however modest, is bad for health.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
But, if we look at the people dependent on alcohol and experiencing withdrawal symptoms during the Covid-19 lockdown, the mental health aspect comes in. We saw this earlier this month in Kerala, where seven people committed suicide due to the non-availability of liquor.
From this perspective, a curb on the liquor sales increases stress and self-harm. A public health perspective on the ban of alcohol sales would mean that the state has to take care of mental health needs of the people at the same time. Under lockdown, all non-emergency healthcare and generic OPD services are suffering, so is mental healthcare. We also need to keep in mind that women are at the receiving end of this ban and are being subjected to domestic violence. That said, the other critical question is why should we dwell on alcohol if it’s not an essential commodity?
You cannot see this question from a moral point of view because you immediately leave out a section of our society that is suffering from alcoholism. They should be seen with equal empathy as the other people in need of healthcare.
Suyash Rai
Fellow, Carnegie India
According to one estimate, in a year, states collect Rs 2 lakh crore by taxing liquor sales, which makes up at least 15 per cent of the tax revenue of states. This has been adversely impacted in the last five weeks. That’s a big problem in the current Covid-19 crisis, as the states are already cash-strapped. All sources of revenue are drying up for them.
In addition to SGST, sales tax/VAT, tax on property transactions, and state excise duties, their main source of revenue is the share they receive from Centre’s tax collection.
Since economic activity has mostly come to a standstill, most of the states’ own tax revenues are under stress. Further, the Centre may also collect and share much lower tax amount than budgeted because its sources of tax revenue — corporation tax, income tax, GST, excise duty and customs, are under stress. GST collection for both Centre and state will be low because consumption is low. Corporate tax will suffer because profitability for most firms is likely to be low. Taxes on petroleum products will also fall because of the fall in consumption.
Alcohol can be easily sold in a way that does not violate social distancing norms like through home delivery. Even if liquor is sold at a higher price, I’m sure many people would be more than willing to pay for it. This will help the states fiscally, and also get some part of economic activity going.
Dr Soham D. Bhaduri
Editor, The Indian Practitioner & healthcare commentator
Banning of alcohol during the Covid-19 crisis is a tricky thing. We have a directive principle to curb alcohol consumption except medicinally, which may be comfortably invoked here by some. Permitting free sale of alcohol during the Covid-19 lockdown is imprudent given that isolation predisposes to psychological aberrations and violence, which may be exacerbated by alcohol.
Add to it the fact that lockdown can itself predispose people to excessive drinking, which can make things even worse. On the other hand, alcohol withdrawal and concomitant ills like suicides and substitution with toxic substitutes can be a problem, given the reduced access to healthcare. Most withdrawal patients require continued supportive counselling, supervision, and medications; a small percentage may even require emergency management.
We should find a middle path here. The main rationale behind curbing alcohol during Covid crisis is that people shouldn’t congregate in social drinking and spread the infection.
We may permit regulated alcohol consumption, while ensuring social distancing and not letting intakes shoot up too much. There are safe-drinking guidelines prepared by various experts – this could be a good opportunity to fervently promote them. At the same time, adequate arrangements for handling withdrawal and treating dependence must be made available, and smooth access to them should be ensured.
Also read: Arnab Goswami vs Congress: Drama for TV ratings or attack on free speech?
By Pia Krishnankutty, journalist at ThePrint
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
It is proven fact that banning of the liquor will effect states adversely and by taking the record of law enforcing in India, is there any proof, that the business will not go into the hands of criminals, who will do it with the help of corrupt people in administration and police. infect the money now going in to the govt treasury will start flowing into the pockets of criminals who may use it in the  legal acts or may flow to fund the terrorism. The lives lost will be much more with the illicit liquor then now the controlled one.
Loss of revenue for the state….what’s the point?
I am a corporate management employee, Have to engage myself on VC Meetings and concalls, Working on laptop daily at least 14-16 hours In both situation lockdown or normal.
Before going to have dinner and sleep I am addict to havr drink daily, Unfortunately I am unable to express my mental situation nowadays due to non availability of liquor.
I am sure that there are lakhs of  profeshionals like me are facing the same horribal situation?
Needless to state that what and how we contribute to nation in terms of taxes from our salaries as well as engagement/ employment to peoples working in our subbordinate chain.
I am sure if the Govt/ administrative authorities can make it available on doorstep by charging the homedelivery expences but only what is needed is attention of govt. over citizens like us.
Try to understand our pathetic situation that after working more than 12hours daily we are not able to get a sleep at night which is leading  to bring towards stress and dipression.
