Noida authorities seek donations from residents to help fight Covid-19 crisis
New Delhi: In order to tide over the coronavirus crisis, the District Magistrate of Noida’s Gautam Buddh Nagar has sought voluntary contributions from its residents even as the Uttar Pradesh state government has taken measures to prevent the largescale exodus of labourers and daily wagers from the state.
Dear Residents of Gautambuddhanagar Please send it to all. pic.twitter.com/yOJnAK3GP2
— DM G.B. Nagar (@dmgbnagar) March 27, 2020

“We have come out with a specific bank account for those residents who are willing to voluntarily contribute to the state government as it faces the challenge of Covid-19. There are many who want to donate money to the poor and marginal, this account is for them,” BN Singh, District Magistrate, Gautam Buddh Nagar (Noida) told ThePrint, adding that the invoking of the Disaster Management Act 2005 has led him to take this step.
Under the Act, which has been invoked for the first time in the country, states come under the control of the Centre.
In his appeal to the residents, Singh said that this is a crisis that every city is facing in every Indian state, so it is imperative that every citizen do their bit to tide over the situation.
“The funds collected will not only be used for medical facilities but to create shelter homes and other such facilities to resolve the crisis. These are unprecedented times, so every state government is doing what they can to the best of their abilities,” Singh explained.
Also read: Journalist behind story of starving Dalits eating grass in Varanasi district gets notice 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Meanwhile, keeping in mind the largescale exodus of poor labourers and daily wage earners from Noida to their villages in remote Uttar Pradesh, Singh on Friday also ordered all landlords of Gautam Buddh Nagar to not collect rent from them for one month. However, the rent is not waived, but collection is to be postponed owing to the 21-day lockdown of the country as ordered by Prime Minister Narendra Modi earlier this week.
As per the order, landlords found guilty of violating the rule can be jailed for up to one year or may be forced to pay a hefty penalty. “The landlords have been asked that they should not let these people leave the city just because they cannot pay their rents. We have resolve the crisis first,” Singh said.
As of now, more than 20 positive cases of Covid-19 have been confirmed in Gautam Buddh Nagar.
People who are willing to contribute can do so either by issuing a cheque or a draft to the State Bank of India Account No. 30049902873 with IFSC Code SBIN0005106. The funds can be transferred electronically also.
