UP doctor dies, social media posts claim it was after she was attacked by Covid-19 patient
New Delhi: A social media post has emerged claiming a doctor in Uttar Pradesh had died of the Covid-19 infection after contracting it from “Islamic Jihadi patients” who attacked her.
According to the post, which was put up on Twitter and Facebook, Dr Vandana Tiwari contracted the virus while trying to test patients, and insinuated that the patients were among those who attended the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in Delhi’s Nizamuddin last month. The post includes a photograph of an injured woman lying on a hospital bed.
The post was shared by the Hindu Yuva Vahini Surat in-charge Sumer Chaudhary and was liked 1,700 times and shared over 700 times.
Another Twitter user ‘Bindiya Rajput’ also shared the post, which was liked 4,000 times. Similar posts about this alleged incident have been shared on Facebook and Twitter.
The Tablighi Jamaat congregation, held in New Delhi mid-March, has become the largest vector of the Covid-19 infection in South Asia, resulting in a controversy targeting Muslims.
There have also been reports of some of the Tablighi patients ‘misbehaving’ with medical personnel, abusing and harassing them at quarantine camps.
Also read: NSA slapped against quarantined Tablighi Jamaat members who harassed nurses in Ghaziabad
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The woman in the photograph is Dr Vandana Tiwari, and it is true that she passed away. However, she died of a brain haemorrhage on 1 April at a hospital in Gwalior.
Tiwari was a pharmacist in Shivpuri Medical College in Madhya Pradesh and was part of a Covid-19 containment team. According to a report in a local newspaper, she was brought to the hospital on 31 March as her health deteriorated while on duty. She was later referred to a hospital in Gwalior.
The post began making the rounds on social media on 8 April. The Uttar Pradesh Police put out tweet clarifying that the incident had nothing to do with the state, while police in Agra also tweeted that their cyber cell will further investigate the matter.
साइबर सेल आगरा को आवश्यक कार्यवाही हेतु निर्देशित किया गया है।
— AGRA POLICE (@agrapolice) April 9, 2020

While some of the tweets have since been deleted, others are still available on Facebook and Twitter.
Many fake posts criticising and attacking the Tablighis have emerged. Among them are claims of a ‘corona-jihad’ being waged by Muslims.
CCTV Footage shows This MuIIаh INTENTIONALLY coughed on Mans face!! Then he goes around touching stuff. Such VILЕ minded people😡😡 Stay away from these Сrееру people #TJKMKB #TablighiJamatVirus #CoronaJihad #CoronavirusPandemic #COVID2019india pic.twitter.com/rFwsyrExeV
— Rosy (@rose_k01) April 3, 2020

#TablighiJamaat has ashamed whole #Muslims across country. By their sheer arrogance and hatred towards the country they have crossed all limits of decency. The videos and messages circulating across media are shameful and cant be justified in any way. #CoronaJihad is condemnable.
— Er Aijaz Hussain (@IAmErAijaz) April 2, 2020

(In collaboration with Hoax Slayer)
Also read: Call it a mistake, not conspiracy against India, say Muslim scholars on Tablighi Jamaat event
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
