Army tells units to observe ‘no movement’ amid lockdown, graded relaxation from 20 April
New Delhi: The Army has issued fresh directions to all its units across the country to adhere to a strict “no movement” order in the wake of the extension of the nationwide lockdown until 3 May, even as it allowed graded relaxation from 20 April.
According to the directions issued Thursday, all military establishments, cantonments, formation headquarters and units will observe strict “no movement” until 19 April. Only personnel connected with provision of essential services will be allowed to move in this period.
“This will not hinder any operational tasks of the formations or units which will be conducted with the requisite strength,” the order said.
However, the Directorate General Medical Services (Army) will continue to function at full strength. All medical establishments and hospitals will also continue functioning at full strength.
“It is about maintaining a delicate balance between what can be avoided and what cannot be,” a senior Army officer told ThePrint on condition of anonymity.
The Army, which has put severe restrictions on the movement of its personnel, training and even introduced work-from-home without affecting the operational necessity, is at the forefront of fighting India’s war against Covid-19.
Also read: Army advises personnel to use govt’s Aarogya Setu app, but with usual cyber precautions
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
According to the latest order, only the military operations, military intelligence, operational logistics and strategic movement branches will function within the Army Headquarters to carry out operational and Covid-19 related tasks.
However, the duration of stay and strength within these branches will be at bare minimum.
The order added that the remaining branches will work from home and any specific task can be handled on a case-to-case basis.
Within command headquarters, only manpower, logistics and operations branch will function with skeletal staff, barring Northern and Eastern Command, where additionally the intelligence branch will also function.
After 19 April, offices in the Army HQ, Command HQ and Formation HQ may start functioning at 50 per cent strength, the order said.
It added that all training activities and temporary duties will remain suspended until 3 May. However, directions on actions to be taken after that will be issued on receipt of fresh orders from the government.
All social, sports, entertainment, academic, cultural and religious gatherings continue to remain suspended. “No religious congregations, regimental or ceremonial functions will be permitted,” said the order.
It also added that offices falling in ‘Hotspots or Containment Zones’ will observe strict “No Movement” until they are denotified. Exceptions to be given will depend on the local military authority, it said.
Movement and training will have to await fresh orders.
The Army has seen four confirmed cases of Covid-19 so far, of which one has recovered. The latest case came Tuesday, when an Army doctor involved in the force’s operation against the Covid-19 pandemic tested positive for the novel coronavirus.
