Ramdev sends Ayurveda medicines to quarantined Uttarakhand CM Rawat, ministers to fight Covid
New Delhi: Yoga guru Ramdev has provided Uttarakhand Chief Minister Trivendra Singh Rawat and his cabinet with Ayurvedic medicines and potions to “combat” coronavirus.
CM Rawat and cabinet ministers Harak Singh Rawat, Madan Kaushik and Subodh Uniyal went into self-quarantine Monday after Tourism Minister Satpal Maharaj tested positive for the novel coronavirus.
Maharaj, along his wife and 21 others including his family and staff members who were staying in the same household, have tested positive.
Also read: Modi govt’s love for Ayurveda may be undermining ancient medicinal system
Speaking to ThePrint, CM Rawat said, “Yoga guru Baba Ramdev has sent various types of Ayurevdic powders and other ingredients, including Ashwagandha, giloy booti, ​​tulsi booti etc., to me. He has also advised me to inculcate Yoga and Pranayam (a deep breathing technique) in daily my routine.”
He added, “I had been doing Yoga and Pranayam regularly in the past. The culinary habits of our state are also quite suitable for automatically increasing our immunity. My appeal to the people of the state is not to be afraid of corona. Do not indulge in any kind of fear mongering. Let us join PM Modi’s campaign for ‘self-reliant India’ and also endeavour to create a self-reliant Uttarakhand.”
Rawat said the people of his state are following all safety rules.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“Already, all the residents from my state including me are following PM Modi’s mantra of donning face masks and following a safe distance of two yards. At present, my family and I are under quarantine, following all the rules. I am working from my home,” he said.
Urban Development Minister Madan Kaushik, who has also quarantined himself, told ThePrint, “I have received several Ayurvedic medicines sent by Yoga guru Baba Ramdev. I will surely use them. Right now I am self-quarantined at my home. I have been regularly following Yoga.”
According to S.K. Tijarewala, spokesperson for Patanjali Ayurveda, Ramdev has provided Ayurvedic medicines to all Uttarakhand cabinet ministers to help them boost their immunity.
“Many Ayurvedic medicines and all other associated treatment materials have been delivered to the entire Uttarakhand cabinet and 22 other people, including the CM of Uttarakhand… These include turmeric decoction, hadark, basil, ashwagandha and several other items. They all serve as immunity boosters and form a kind of security wall between the body and the coronavirus,” he said.
The government went into lockdown after the tourism minister tested positive for Covid-19. Maharaj had attended a cabinet meeting Friday where several other ministers, the CM and senior state government officials were present.
As a safety measure, everyone who interacted with Maharaj have gone into self-quarantine. All officials are now working from home.
