In crisis, 3 govt organs legislature, executive & judiciary should act in harmony: CJI Bobde
New Delhi: Chief Justice of India S.A. Bobde Monday said “the three organs of the government (legislature, executive and judiciary) should act in harmony” in times of crisis.
Responding to allegations that the judiciary is toeing the government line amid the Covid-19 crisis, Justice Bobde said the three ‘Ms’ — money, men and material — are with the executive and it is for the executive to decide how these should be deployed and prioritised. 
“Epidemic or any disaster can be best handled by the executive,” the CJI said during a telephonic conversation with the media.
About the judiciary, he said, “We are not taking rest and we are working and disposing of the cases.” 
“The judiciary is doing whatever it can during the crisis,” he added. 
The apex court has been conducting hearings through video conferencing since 27 March, two days after the lockdown came into effect, and Justice Bobde now confirmed that while proceedings via video are here to stay, they will not entirely replace physical court hearings.
Also read: SC calls healthcare workers coronavirus warriors, sets up helpline to redress complaints
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Ever since the Covid-19 outbreak reached India, the Supreme Court has been flooded with public interest litigations (PILs) demanding various measures for tackling the crisis. 
However, in most cases so far, the top court has refused to intervene after accepting the central government’s submissions that it is handling the situation.
Justice Bobde said in cases related to the Covid-19 crisis, the court has asked the executive to take appropriate steps and has sought reports on the steps taken. 
“It (cases related to Covid-19) is a sub judice matter. But we have done whatever we can. We are not on the field,” he added. 
He also pointed out that while over 200 cases were filed every day in the Supreme Court in January this year, only 305 cases have been filed online so far in April. 
“Cause of action for judicial intervention is not happening. Thieves are not committing crime… Crime rate has come down. Police action has also gone down,” he said, adding pressure of litigation on courts has reduced.
Justice Bobde also said “undoubtedly, the executive cannot allow the lives of the citizens to be endangered”, but if that happens, “courts will intervene”.
Also read: ‘How long will people sustain?’ SC issues notice on plea against media layoffs
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
