How Bengal’s Covid-19 toll went up nearly 4 times in 24 hours after Modi govt probe
Kolkata: The Covid-19 toll for West Bengal went up by three times Friday, hours after the central government wrote to the state chief secretary asking for “case records” of all coronavirus-linked fatalities that had been attributed to other causes by an expert panel constituted by the Mamata Banerjee government. The panel was formed earlier this month to “audit” coronavirus fatalities reported by hospitals in the state. 
The state government said Friday that 57 Covid-19 patients had died in West Bengal but sought to clarify that 39 of these had succumbed to “comorbid conditions”. Coronavirus infection, it added, was ruled “incidental” in their death. Until Thursday, figures released by the state government had pegged the number of deaths at 15.
The fresh information came hours after the inter-ministerial central team (IMCT) wrote to West Bengal Chief Secretary Rajiva Sinha, seeking answers on the formation and functioning of the expert committee. 
Also Read: Nobel winner Abhijit Banerjee to guide Mamata govt on beating lockdown impact on economy 
At a press conference Friday, Sinha said the committee had submitted a comprehensive report that stated it had so far “evaluated” 57 deaths. The committee, he added, had ruled Covid-19 as the primary and direct cause of death in 18 of these cases. In the remaining 39, Sinha said, coronavirus was declared an “incidental finding” and the deaths were attributed to “severe comorbid conditions”. 
Global trends thus far have indicated that coronavirus, which has an overall low fatality rate, is quite lethal for those with comorbid conditions such as diabetes and hypertension, and the elderly. This fact raises questions about the government’s approach to analysing coronavirus fatalities.
The expert committee of five doctors that audits Covid-19 fatalities in West Bengal was formed on 3 April. 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Only three coronavirus deaths were declared in West Bengal before the committee was formed and the figure has been updated only six times in three weeks. The committee is said to meet twice a week to determine the cause of death. 
The committee comprises the state’s director for medical education. It follows a checklist of at least 24 points, including comorbid conditions, to ascertain “the cause of death” of a person “who has tested positive for Covid-19”.
Other checkpoints include providing a patient’s history, including “duration and type of fever, sore throat, breathlessness, complete blood count, sodium and potassium levels” etc. 
Hospitals across the state have been asked to adhere to the checklist and attach “supporting documents” for an “audit” by the expert committee.
According to the expert panel’s report submitted Friday, accessed by ThePrint, the “committee examined all the relevant documents including… treatment history, laboratory investigation reports, death certificate and other documents sent by the hospitals concerned” and found 18 deaths to be the result of Covid-19.
The rest were attributed to “comorbid conditions” like “cardiomyopathy with chronic kidney disease, renal failure, cerebro-vascular-accident, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, multi-organ failure in type-II diabetes and so on”.  
Asked if the distinction made in the classification of Covid-19-linked deaths was in line with ICMR guidelines, Sinha said it was a technical issue he couldn’t comment on. 
“There are doctors in the expert committee. They had taken up cases of death that happened even before the committee was formed. The medical reasoning and cause of death can only be determined by doctors. We are bureaucrats and we cannot comment on that,” he added. 
Also Read: 3 Bengal districts tagged hotspot by Modi govt ‘haven’t reported Covid-19 cases in a week’
The IMCT, which landed in West Bengal three days ago amid much opposition from the Mamata Banerjee dispensation, shot off two letters to the state government Friday, seeking a five-point clarification about the expert committee. 
The letter, signed by IMCT leader Apurva Chandra, seeks the government order issued to constitute the committee, case records of all Covid-19 fatalities attributed to other causes by the panel, time taken by the committee in coming to the conclusion, whether there are similar committees in the state to ascertain the cause of death for other diseases, and whether such a committee is in line with ICMR guidelines or medical practice. The IMCT also requested an interaction with the committee. There are currently two IMCTs in Bengal, both led by Chandra.
Since the IMCT’s arrival, the state appears to be reporting more cases of Covid-19. 
For instance, according to the health bulletin issued 17 April, the total number of active cases was 162. On 20 April, the figure was 245, a rise just under than 100. Four days later, on 24 April, the state reported 385 active cases, an increase of 140. 
Testing has also picked up. While 4,212 samples had been tested by 17 April, the number was 5,469 by 20 April and 8,933 by 24 April. The average per-day testing figures have shot up to 943 from 240.
Addressing the media Thursday, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee weighed in on the discrepancy. She said the central government was either sending faulty kits or withdrawing the ones sent, adding that testing had picked up because the state was procuring kits on its own. 
The IMCT’s letters Friday also raise questions about the state’s testing and reporting patterns, besides some “infrastructural issues” at local hospitals.
However, the Trinamool Congress sought to defend its handling of the crisis. 
“The problem surfaced here as the Centre sent us all faulty kits. We could not conduct the required number of tests as we did not have kits,” Santanu Sen, a Trinamool Congress MP and former member of the Indian Medical Association (IMA) said.  
Also Read: Mamata gives Rs 10 lakh insurance cover to journalists, asks them to report positive news
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Death of comorbidity is the main reason behind it. If it were there, people could have a chance to die at least by diarrhea. The expert committee must be revived and  all death cases should be examined and examined and examined at least for 10 years — these are the preconditions of bringing back the covid death. And no doctor should have any right to say anything about death.
it is mamta’s dirty politics, hiding the facts to save her image, this lowest level of politics taking the lives of people.
Mamata didi’s hiding the exact figure cost her top in terms of politics
There are illegal immigrants mostly from Bangladesh who are  staying here in particular kalimpong district illegally.  there are many cases but NOT shown in numbers because it the cause of death is revealed then,they even have to show their nationality!!! this is why… numbers are wrong.  I hope modi ji would address this issue and take necessary actions!!!!!
Come on and get alerted, people of Bengal, it is time to retrospect yourself for your present condition, your state gave the intelligent and patriotic personalities to the nation, now it is the time to select and elect the patriotic leader for your development and for a bright future.
Come on and get alerted, people of Bengal, it is time to retrospect yourself for your present condition, your state gave the intelligent and patriotic personalities to the nation, now it is the time to select and elect the patriotic leader for your development and for a bright future.
How can Mamatadi show the numbers as there is a huge numbers of illegal immigrants are staying in West Bengal. If a death occurs of the illegals , she has to show the nationality of the deceased. So no report of death, no death certificate & no questions will be asked.
God save us. ( Bengali Hindus)
CAN ANYONE PLEASE FILE A CRIMINAL CASE IN THE CALCUTTA HIGH COURT FOR CULPABLE HOMICIDE NOT AMOUNTING TO MURDER FOR WILLFUL NEGLIGENCE AND DISREGARD TO CENTRAL GUIDELINES AGAINST COVID-19, LOCKDOWN AND NON-REPORTING MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Along with the CM, show-cause the Principal Secretary of WB who submitted his backbone to the illiterate cadres of the party.
Every catastrophe offers some vicious opportunities to some morbid leaders who find dividends by grabbing rations meant for poor out of which some is distributed to their own lot, by supplying poor quality food fudging with quantity at exorbitant prices,  Didi has put in place new syndicate at works.
It is mind boggling to observe the way Corona cases are being handled. It is clear that TJ have become carriers of this deadly virus knowingly or unknowingly and if these facts are revealed in public domain, Didi may lose non muslim votebank hence, all the secrecy. However, public already know this fact and presence of TJ in bengal and how they are spreading it. Didi may snatch few voters by distributing ration to BJP voters on condition of changing sides but lose hugely if Corona bubble bursts in bengal. It’d be impossible to put blame on centre. First, CAA & now Corona, her core votebank has created fear among bhadra bengali manush which may bring her fall so it would be politically wise for Didi to tie all loose knots and act fast.
Mamtaj govt should immediately be terminated and central rule imposed in west bengal for quick recovery from covid 19. Else the whole state will get infected soon.
Can the local administration update the number 57 as it’s now 2 days old or shall we wait for the second round of Audit before it gets updated.
Can the department update the number 57, which is now 2 days old. This will help the CITIZENS of West Bengal in understanding the ground realty and take self precautionary measures.
Mamata Banerjee and her cronies are an absolute disgrace to this country. Deception, deception and deception. Unfortunately, the stupid Bengali community in west Bengal keep supporting the lady.
I know that CPM brought Bengal to the drain, Mamata Banerjee is completing the task by flushing West Bengal down the drain.
Rest in peace state of West Bengal
Would request you to place your sincere comments on CORONAVIRUS KOLKATA Facebook column.. tks
This is clear case of under reporting as I have pointed out earlier.
WB govt is intentionally hiding the figures and not testing enough hotspots of pieceful community.
