Goa reports its first coronavirus cases as 3 test positive
Panaji: Three persons, all with travel history abroad, tested positive for coronavirus in Goa on Wednesday, health department officials said, as the tourist haven joined the states which have reported COVID-19 cases.
This is the first time the tourist state has reported coronavirus positive cases.
The Directorate of Health Services, in a late night press statement here, said three suspected cases of COVID-19 from Goa, whose test results were awaited, have turned out positive.
All three are male patients of ages 25, 29 and 55 years. They have travel history of returning to Goa from Spain, Australia and the USA, respectively, the officials said.
The condition of the trio, admitted in Goa Medical College and Hospital near here, is stable, the officials added.
Chief Minister Pramod Sawant said the state is providing the best healthcare facility to the diagnosed patients.
I have been informed by the state Directorate of Health services that three individuals have been tested positive for #COVID19 in Goa.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“We are providing the best healthcare facility to the diagnosed patients, he said.
Their condition is stable at present. e have also traced their contacts and are quarantining them, Sawant added.
Health Minister Vishwajit Rane said the government is taking all precautions and following guidelines related to the viral infection.
In view of the three positive coronavirus cases in Goa, we are following all guidelines laid down by the central government and taking all precautions with the support of chief minister Pramod Sawant, he said.
Our testing facility will be up and running in the next two days. Our team of doctors is doing its est to make sure we contain the spread of virus in the state, Rane added.
Also read: Transmission of coronavirus through newspapers, currency possible but unlikely: Experts
