Tablighi Jamaat congregation and how religion has been the ‘super spreader’ of coronavirus
New Delhi: Many people linked to the Tablighi Jamaat congregation, which was held in Nizamuddin in Delhi, have tested positive for coronavirus. Six deaths of people related to this event were reported in Telangana Tuesday and this communalised the coronavirus pandemic. Some people have started blaming Muslims. However, many religious congregations have spread this virus.
The first such group was in South Korea. A 61-year-old woman, Patient 31, of South Korea attended two congregations of a Christian cult in Daegu city. Both these events had more than a thousand attendees. Within a week, the number of coronavirus cases in South Korea crossed a thousand. Patient 31 was termed as a super spreader as the number of cases in Korea kept on increasing. 
Baldev Singh, a preacher, had gone to Italy and Germany. He violated the home quarantine order after returning to India. He attended the Hola Mohalla festival with tens of thousands of people and visited homes to give his blessings. Out of the first 33 cases in Punjab, 32 were directly linked to Singh. Now, Singh is termed as India’s super spreader.
Also read: Preacher who was Punjab’s 1st Covid-19 death could have been a ‘super-spreader’
Tablighi Jamaat, a non-political global Sunni Islamic evangelical movement of Indian origin, has now been termed as the “largest known viral vector” of the novel coronavirus in South Asia. Tablighi Jamaat (or society for spreading faith) is a missionary movement that focuses on urging Muslims to return to primary Sunni Islam, particularly in matters of rituals, attire and personal behaviour. Started in 1927 by Muhammad Ilyas al-Kandhlawi in Mewat, India, it has been called “one of the most influential religious movements in 20th century Islam”.
In February, approximately 16,000 Tablighis gathered at a mosque in Malaysia from across the region. More than 620 people connected to the four-day conclave have tested positive in Malaysia, prompting the country to seal its borders until the end of the month. Most of the 73 coronavirus cases in Brunei are tied to the gathering, as are 10 cases in Thailand. Even in Pakistan, 27 members of Tablighi Jamaat, out of the 35 screened at their headquarters in Raiwind, tested positive for coronavirus Sunday.
Many people returning from pilgrimages in Iran were also coronavirus-positive. It is reported that nine of the people in the Army’s quarantine facility, who were brought back from Iran are infected by the disease. Iran had closed down its shrines, but hardliners are seen forcing their way in. Other religious places are also closed due to the pandemic. 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Mecca has been closed by Saudi Arabia and Hajj is likely to be cancelled this year. It has been cancelled 40 times since the year 629. The Christian festival Easter, next month, too, will be affected by the pandemic.
Watch the latest episode of CTC here:

 
Also read: Tablighi Jamaat blames ‘govt planning’ as BJP, AAP attack it for spike in Covid-19 cases
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Dear Shekar Gupta
I have reading  and listening to your opinions online, and watching your prohrams,   I regard you highly as one of rhe few unbiased journalist but unfortunately  I find this article only pointing to Markaj or Jamaat,  while you also kept mum over the Punjab and other temple events that the Godi media is hiding,  I wish you have included  this Punjab story and also temples where such lapses happened  mainly due bad communications and mismanagement by different authorities.  Here is the snippets from Hindustan times snippets with link for anyone interested to read the full story in Hindustan Times,   which says 25000 people were quarantied, which BBC says there were 40,000
whihttps://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/coronavirus-update-70-year-old-preacher-from-punjab-may-have-infected-27-people/story-oJB7HYfPB5c7T7LetmJKqO.html
A 70-year-old religious preacher from Punjab’s Shaheed Bhagat Singh Nagar, who returned home from Germany earlier this month, has emerged as a possible super-spreader who likely infected 27 people, government officials said on Friday. The preacher or ‘granthi’, Baldev Singh, died on March 18 and is, until now, Punjab’s only Covid-19 victim.
Singh was found to have been infected by coronavirus only after his death on March 18. Since then, health authorities have been racing against time to trace his contact history and quarantining people who came in contact with him.
Out of five cases that were confirmed on Friday, four were in contact with Singh. At least 20 villages in three districts – with a total population of nearly 25,000 – have been sealed because Singh visited these areas after his return from Germany on March 7.
Banga sub-divisional magistrate Gautam Jain said at least 700 people who had come in close contact with Singh had been quarantined.
Tabligi is a virus more dangerous than corona and they are trying to spread since years with money from wahabi saudis. Hope this shall stop now
Is it possible and I mean is it ever possible under the laws of Science and nature that muslims as a collective group can deliberately with malicious intent do something wrong .In the universe of THE PRINT : no. where no means “NEVER EVER EVER”
Yes,yes they will only talk on very serious issues like what serial is telecast on television?
They are very busy to comment on silly issues!
The following information published in BBC:
“”Image copyright REUTERS
The captain of a US aircraft carrier carrying more than 4,000 crew has called for urgent help to halt a coronavirus outbreak on his ship.
Scores of people on board the Theodore Roosevelt have tested positive for the infection. The carrier is currently docked in Guam.
