India to develop ‘fully indigenous’ Covid vaccine as ICMR partners with Bharat Biotech
New Delhi: India Saturday officially entered the race to develop a Covid-19 vaccine. The Indian Council Medical Research (ICMR) announced a tie-up with the Bharat Biotech International Limited for the development of a “fully indigenous vaccine for Covid-19”.
.@ICMRDELHI has transferred the #Covid_19 strain isolated at @icmr_niv to @bharatbiotech. We will be partnering with them to develop an indigenous #Covid_19 vaccine!#icmrfightscovid19 #IndiaFightsCoronavirus @MoHFW_INDIA #MakeInIndia pic.twitter.com/Q73JZsU30f
— ICMR (@ICMRDELHI) May 9, 2020

The tally of Covid-19 cases in India has crossed the 60,000 mark.
According to a statement issued by the ICMR, “the virus strain isolated at” the National Institute of Virology laboratory in Pune will be used to develop the vaccine. “The strain has been successfully transferred from NIV to Bharat Biotech International Ltd. (BBIL). Work on vaccine development has been initiated between the two partners.”
Currently, over 100 candidate vaccines are in different stages of development around the world, according to the World Health Organization. Eight of such vaccines, including ones being developed by US-based biotech company Moderna and the University of Oxford, are undergoing clinical evaluation.
Also read: World’s most accurate antibody test has arrived. Or has it?
This is the first time that a vaccine for Covid-19 is being developed in India, which reported its first cases way back in January.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Speaking to ThePrint, Dr Rajnikant Srivastava, ICMR’s head of the Department of Research Management, Policy Planning and Communication, in Delhi and Director of Regional Medical Research Centre, Gorakhpur, however, maintained that it didn’t take considerable time for such a project to be initiated.
“There were only three cases till March. We started working in March…In only two months we were able to isolate the virus, culture it and transfer it for vaccine development,” he said.
According to ICMR’s statement, NIV Pune, the first laboratory in the country to begin testing for Covid-19, “will provide continuous support to BBIL for vaccine development”. Srivastava said BBIL was chosen for its “expertise in vaccine development”. “Earlier, they had developed the vaccine for the Japanese encephalitis, so they were chosen…They will manufacture the vaccine,” he said.
The vaccine, he said, will take anywhere from six months to one year to be developed as it will undergo the standard trials on animals and humans.
The tally of Covid-19 cases climbed to 62,939 on Sunday as 3,277 more cases were registered. The highest increase was recorded in Maharashtra where the number of cases rose to 20,228 from 19,063.
Also read: Israel isolates antibody in ‘significant breakthrough’ for possible Covid-19 treatment
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
