Coronavirus cases in Delhi climb to 1,510, task force set up to identify suspected cases
New Delhi: The number of coronavirus cases in Delhi rose to 1,510 on Monday and four deaths were reported within 24 hours, as the Delhi government set up a task force to identify suspected coronavirus cases in all districts of the city.
With the number of COVID-19 containment zones in the city rising to 47 on Monday, a massive sanitisation drive has begun in those areas to prevent further spread of the disease.
According to a Delhi government health department bulletin, 356 fresh cases were reported on Monday — the highest spike in a day so far. The death toll also rose to 28.
On Sunday, the number of COVID-19 cases stood at 1154.
More cases of medical and para-medical personnel being tested novel coronavirus positive were reported.
A doctor, a nurse and a non-medical staff at Max Hospital in south Delhi’s Saket have tested positive for the virus.
In Sir Ganga Ram Hospital in central Delhi, COVID-19 tests were conducted on all 115 healthcare workers who were quarantined two weeks ago and only three of them have tested positive.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The three who tested positive for the pathogen are an endoscopy technician and two nurses, hospital authorities said.
Amid the rising number of cases, a ‘Corona Foot Warriors Containment and Surveillance Force’ has been constituted at every booth level by Chief Secretary Vijay Dev, a Delhi government official told PTI.
Each team of the force will have five members including a booth-level officer, civil defence volunteer, police constable, sanitation and anganwadi worker, the official said.
According to him, 13,750 such teams will also advise people to maintain social distancing and wear masks when going outdoors.
The teams will recommend suspected cases for testing to the district health authorities, the official said, adding anganwadi workers will be trained by the health department.
The government launched a massive sanitisation drive in those areas declared as red zones, and high-risk zones identified by the colour orange to prevent the spread of the disease.
“Massive sanitisation drive underway in Delhi. Sixty machines, including 10 hi-tech Japanese machines, have been deployed,” Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal tweeted.
The administration ran a pilot disinfection drive using the hi-tech Japanese spray machines at Rajinder Nagar Assembly constituency.
“The key target of the Delhi government is to focus on containment zones. Therefore, the disinfection drive will start with the red zones. In Rajinder Nagar Vidhan Sabha, we have started a pilot project with three such machines in presence of experts to analyse the performance and results thereof,” local MLA Raghav Chadha said.
“We sanitised the whole area and studied all the necessary parameters. After a careful consultation with the experts, it has been decided that this is a fully equipped technology, and the disinfection drive should immediately start at the containment zones,” he said.
This is the first time in India that such advanced Japanese technology is being used to tackle the COVID-19 pandemic, he claimed, adding the length of the machine is adjustable and as such it can enter narrow lanes.
The chemical composition used for the disinfection drive adheres to WHO guidelines. These machines spray disinfectants in a way that can kill germs and virus on any solid surface, according to a statement.
Meanwhile, in order to ensure strict compliance of social distancing norms, the Delhi government will implement odd-even rules in all wholesale markets of the city. Traders will sell vegetables on alternate days, Delhi Development Minister Gopal Rai told PTI.
He said the government has also decided to stagger the timings for sale of vegetables and fruits in these ‘mandis’ to ensure social distancing.
“Vegetables will be sold from 6 am to 11 am and fruits from 2 pm to 6 pm in all wholesale markets in Delhi,” Rai said, adding that the decisions were taken at a meeting chaired by him.
There are five major wholesale vegetable and fruit markets in the national capital, including the Azadpur mandi, the Ghazipur mandi and the Okhla mandi. Also, there two wholesale ‘anaj mandis’ (wheat markets) in Najafgarh and Narela.
As per the odd-even rule, sheds, under which traders sell vegetables, will be allowed to operate on alternate days according to their numbers, Rai said.
