In its fight against coronavirus panic, Karnataka govt finds unlikely ally in Telegram app
Bengaluru: The Karnataka government has set up a 24X7 helpline on social media app Telegram to check the proliferation of fake news and rumours about the coronavirus pandemic as well as address residents’ queries and concerns.
Telegram has been chosen for the initiative because it allows one group to have thousands of members.
Launched by Karnataka’s Department of Information and Public Relations (DIPR) at 10.46 pm on 13 March, the ‘CoVid-19 Karnataka -Sahaya Group’ had over 6,000 members as of Sunday evening. It’s handled by teams of five members — including doctors — in eight-hour shifts.
Officials from government departments form the back-end team to ensure seamless coordination and dissemination of accurate information. They provide information on matters such as closure of schools, procedures for home quarantine and emergency contact numbers.
The initiative is said to have stemmed from Karnataka Chief Minister B.S. Yediyurappa’s emphasis on ensuring the dissemination of correct information about COVID-19 to avoid panic. 
Captain P. Manivannan, secretary of the DIPR, said it was his team that came up with the idea of launching a social media group. 
“We knew that the best way to reduce fake news and panic is to be there and answer the questions and doubts the public has in real time. We need to curb the fake news before it grows and spreads like CoViD19,” Manivannan told ThePrint.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also Read: COVID-19 a ‘boomer remover’ — Why millennials are angry and done with older generation
The Telegram group has left users impressed with its prompt response.
Sample this: A Telegram user posted this message on the group over the weekend: “I called 104 and got an appointment to get tested for nCov-19. But I am unable to understand which hospital they want me to go, and the helpline doesn’t seem to function today …”
The query was immediately forwarded to 104 Arogya Sahayavani, the health helpline for COVID-19 cases, and patient details shared. 
When another user sought to know where they should report the sale of masks — a key prevention tool — above the MRP, he was told within minutes to approach the Department of Drug Control and police, and given the requisite phone numbers.
Another user messaged, “I was just stopped by a police check post — They don’t have masks, they are at high risk and we need them the most to maintain law and order.” “Thanks. They will get masks,” came the prompt answer from Manivannan. 
The rules of the group are strict. People are not allowed to post personal comments or videos, and any unrelated comments or queries are immediately deleted and the user blocked after a warning.
“We, officials, have benefited from the people’s responses. And they also know that their government is awake 24×7 and they need not worry,” Manivannan said. “A responsive government is a good government that people trust.”
Karnataka has reported six positive CoVID-19 cases, including the first fatality in the country. The other five include IT professionals and their family members who are under quarantine and undergoing treatment in Bengaluru.
Also Read: India can fight COVID-19, but only if the private sector is allowed to step in quickly
