30% of India’s Covid-19 positive caseload linked to Tablighi Jamaat meet, says govt
New Delhi: The Narendra Modi government Saturday said of the 14,378 Covid-19 cases in India, more than 4,000 are linked to the March congregation of Tablighi Jamaat in New Delhi.
“Nearly 29.8 per cent of the country’s total Covid-19 cases are linked to the Markaz (Nizamuddin Markaz) cluster incident. The attendees to the congregation have affected people in a total of 23 states and union territories,” Lav Aggarwal, joint secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, said at a press briefing.
The government also said Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh were most affected due to the congregation.
Of the total cases in Tamil Nadu, 84 per cent are linked to the Tablighi Jamaat event, making it the most affected state. Telangana has 79 per cent cases linked to the Delhi congregation, followed by Delhi at 63 per cent, Andhra Pradesh (61 per cent) and Uttar Pradesh (59 per cent).
Also read: How a Tablighi Jamaat meet in Nalanda in March has set off panic in Bihar
The government also said there was a relapse of Covid-19 cases in Patna (Bihar), Nadia (West Bengal) and Panipat (Haryana), where instances of coronavirus were reduced to almost zero in the past 14 days.
On Thursday (16 April), the government had shared a list of 27 districts in 17 states where zero samples had tested positive for more than two weeks.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
This list included Patna (Bihar), Nadia (West Bengal), Pauri Garhwal (Uttarakhand), Porbandar and Somnath (Gujarat), Pratapgarh (Rajasthan), Pilibhit (Uttar Pradesh) and West Imphal (Manipur), among other districts.
“Some of the positive cases have again come-up,” Aggarwal said, adding that the battle against coronavirus has to continue and it requires strict vigilance from all citizens.
India’s mortality rate due to Covid-19 is 3.3 per cent and three fourth of the deaths have been of people above 60 years, the government informed.
The mortality rate stood at 14.4 per cent in the age group of 0 to 45 years and 10.3 per cent in the 45-60 years bracket. It is 33.1 per cent in the 60-75 age bracket and 42.2 per cent in the above 75 years age group.
Combining the 60 to 75 and above age group, almost 75 per cent of the deaths have occurred in this particular bracket. “We have also noticed that 83 per cent of the total deaths were due to co-morbidities in patients,” Aggarwal added.
The country has so far registered 480 deaths.
Also read: ‘It was the least we could do’: When Muslims shouldered a Hindu neighbour’s bier in Jaipur
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
