Flights, railways, inter-state bus travel likely to remain suspended even after 14 April
New Delhi: Flight operations, Railways and inter-state bus services are likely to remain suspended even after 14 April, when the nationwide lockdown is expected to end, ThePrint has learnt.
The move was discussed at a meeting of the Group of Ministers (GoM) on Covid-19 Tuesday, where Amit Shah and Nirmala Sitharaman, among others, were present. The GoM, headed by Defence Minister Rajnath Singh, was held to review the situation and steps taken across the country to fight the virus.
This was the fourth meeting of the GoM on Covid-19 since March 25.
Although no decision was taken on either extending or lifting of the lockdown, the ministers discussed the exit strategy of how it can be lifted in phases.
According to a source in the government, everyone agreed that inter-state movement must be restricted to keep the spread of the virus in check.
“Even if certain restrictions are lifted, inter-state travel will not be allowed even post-14 April. This includes air and rail travel and inter-state bus movement. Because if that starts, people will start moving around the country, which can prove to be dangerous, considering the present circumstances,” the source said.
The source added that although there is a plan to ease certain restrictions by 14 April, complete lifting of the lockdown is “out of question”.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“The ministers agreed that complete lift of the lockdown is out of question. An exit strategy is being worked out on how to go about easing out restrictions and it will be done in phases,” he said.
Besides that, the need to enhance testing across the country, close monitoring using drones and easing restrictions on the movement of agricultural labourers was also discussed, sources told ThePrint.
Also read: Transportation of goods in India comes to near halt amid nationwide lockdown
The GoM also discussed the supply of the essential goods to parts of the country.
“It was noted that essential commodities were available in sufficient quantities and no shortages were reported from anywhere in the country. Also, all supplies are being smoothly transported to parts of the country,” a second source told ThePrint.
The GoM also put forth their concerns over closely monitoring all religious places to keep a check on large gatherings.
“It was felt that places where the public tend to gather in large numbers such as religious centres should be closely monitored and any such gatherings be prevented,” the second source said. “Increased monitoring through drones was also suggested.”
According to the second source, the GoM also discussed measures to enhance testing facilities in medical laboratories.
“The GoM recommended measures to enhance testing facilities in medical laboratories. They are aware that this is the need of the hour and needs to be taken up on priority,” the second source said. “All state governments will be given directions accordingly.”
Although a decision was made to allow agricultural operations during the current harvest season, despite a lockdown, many farmers have not started work as the message has not trickled down to the grassroots level.
The GoM, in this meeting, also decided that the authorities concerned be briefed about how to convey the message to these farmers at the earliest.
“Though the government has said that agricultural operations can go on, considering that a person can very well practice social distancing while working in a field, the message has not trickled down to the grassroots level,” the source said.
“The GoM discussed the same in great detail and has decided to ask concerned authorities to spread the message among farmers that they can come out in the fields to work, while practicing social distancing.”
The GoM also expressed satisfaction over measures put in place to provide shelter and food to migrant workers.
Also read: Trial assessing anti-clotting drug to algorithm guiding PPE use — latest on Covid-19 research
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
Please please think about the person like me who is stuck in Kolkata from 23 rd March 2020. My parents are old, my Mom is an Ostroathritis patient and my father has fallen down from stairs. There is no one to look after them. They are alone in Asansol. In this age, in this fearful condition my father has to go out for shopping. Please run some buses so that the person like me can go home. My parents are helpless, and also me. Please please do something, i want to go to my home in Asansol. I request with Folded hands to the Government of West Bengal to run some Buses.
R/All
I’m  stuck in Jharkhand  as s sudden lick down  was announced  after 24th March no domestic  flights would fly,my ticket was on 25th march Morning. I understand  S/M whatever steps were taken  was for betterment  of each one of us  and  now for another 21 days  till 3rd May .
My mother in law is cancer patient and father in law is 77 yrs old.My husband is also there but he could  not take care as thers is no ladies  at home so they are  facing difficulties  ,pls start flight if not train and can check the passengers  and let them  board flight to maintain  the same.But it’s now very urgent  for me as Medical  problem  to reach home in Durg  City.( Chhattisgarh) pls make some way out I no many more people  are stuck here and there in different  states so pls it’s a request to think for us at the same time.
Thanks and Regards
Harjot
Sir,
I’m Arumugam from kovilpatti Tuticorin district Tamil Nadu. 9894960085
My family locked in Sri kalakasthi andrapradhesh and they suffered without money. I’m ready to pick up my family. So kindly give permission for Tamil Nadu to andrapradhesh to pick up my family.
Kindly help me both 2 state governments pl
Thanks
Arumugam M
We are stuck in durg and my husband in Varanasi. Kindly open way to go back home.
Sir Please open theka in Delhi
pl start flight atleast for 2 days
DEAR SIR AND TO WHOMEVER IT MAY CONCERN AS FAR AS I KNOW WHEN I CONTACTED BEFORE I LEFT MY HOME TO TRAVEL TO INDIA AT THE AIRPORT(SHRI CHATRAPATI SHIVAJI INT.) I HAVE BEEN TOLD THERE WOULD NOT BE ANY SITUATION OF BEING NOT SENT BACK HOME IN THIS COVID 19 SITUATION…SOME OF US LEFT OUR FAMILIES FAR BACK HOME…MILES AWAY, I UNDERSTAND THE CONCERN BUT WE ARE ALSO HUMANS THAT NEED TO SERVE OUR STATE BECAUSE OF THE JOBS WE DO. I DEARLY REQUEST THAT ATLEAST BY END OF APRIL A FEW AIRLINES AT A TIME TO BE INCOMING AND OUTGOING TO REACH ITS PEOPLE TO THEIR FINAL RETURNING DESTINATIONS, OUR FAMILIES ARE SUFFERING WITHOUT US AS WELL ,WHILE OTHERS HAVE THE LUXURY AND THEIR PEOPLE HELPING THEM SOME OF US DON’T I URGE TO GO BACK HOME TO MY OWN SAFE ZONE WHERE MY FAMILY ARE!
I am stuck in pune..please allow airlines.i just want to go home i can’t concentrate on anything even on studies as well for god sake plzzz allow airlines  and that is also on cheapest rate
JUST START THE FLIGHT SERVICE FOR GODS SAKE. My medicines are stuck in courier transit. You can’t start lock down if you inform in 4 hours. God, now they extended for 2 weeks and who knows when they will start the flights.
My daughter is now at Kota Rajasthan.please give me a permission to bring my daughter from Kota to west Bengal..She is a student .
Sir Namaste,
Thanks everyone
And thanks to the Government
That we are Safe at our home.   But
My request to our government to think
about the needy people who are in can’t but
conditions.   Please Help them Sir.
Sir, please open wine shops for 2-3 hours daily. It will help to cope with stress.
Dear sir,
Its been 25 days since I’m stuck here in chennai.
I have booked my train ticket from chennai to bangarpet on 15th of april .. I request you to please free us for Atleast 1/2 days with all the safety we will travel we kindly request you not to extend the lockdown for Atleast 1/2 days
Please allow private vehicles for one  day my husband stuck in Punjab me and my two little kids are alone here…..
Stay at home, that was the tagline right, but what about the people who are miles away from Families form their homes… Just because the government is not organised, why we have to suffer… If we wold have been aware of such a long lock down we would have not left our home’s… It just happened suddenly…
So we where not prepared…
Now take our responsibility for god sake…
Stay at home, that’s what the government ment, but what about the people who aren’t home’s, away from families…  And struggling like shit…
They just declared lockdown all of sudden, and we are now nowhere…
We need help…
We need to be at our home’s…
Dear government, get organized… Just because you are not organised, we have to face all these trouble…
At least let the flight be open, and with all the precautions make us go our home’s… We all will follow all the rules, has we have been following till now, since the date of the lockdown… But as the lockdown have increased, we have left with no choice… I’m stuck in my boutique, I have came here from Nagpur to Mumbai to pay to my staff the labours, and just that day it was declared to be lock down…
Please organise help for people like us as well… Please do not cancel the flights at least…
The decision of extending the lock down is very pathetic for those who are far away from their home Atlest some measures should be taken for people who are away from their home so that they reach home safely. I am stuck in Mumbai since a month now. I want to reach Nagpur asap. As I ma the only son of my widow mother and she surgery  as her hipps bones has been cracked. I have booked ticket for 15 April. I urge my utmost request to take some steps so that at least the people who are away from their home can reach home safely. Atleast start the flight service or rail service only for one or two days for those who are away from home, the police officials can stay with such people till they reach home, so even if someone is affected measures can be taken then and there. Please do not stop the rail and air services after 14th April.  It’s my humble request please please for sake of humanity. 
Reply
Sir I hv stuck on Bihar with 2 children my husband is alone in Kanpur plz allowed any thing so dat i can go plz sir help me out
Are u all mad to issue tickets in railways if u are insisting lockdown again Pls sir let train services resume Our only son is locked down in kota His hostel has been shifted all of a sudden his phone got damaged Already we booked tickets on 117th April Pls resume train services  He is in a hell like condition pls atleast allow the confirm ticket holders to travel pls think of us we will take care of all social distancing
please allow international flights for 2-3 days,My husband went on a business trip to UK ,He stuck there , I’m alone with two little kids struggling in Hyderabad during lockdow,All  other countries are bringing back there citizens to home country,why India is not taking any measures to bring back the Indian citizens.
I am from Manipur and Iam here in delhi with my friends ( 4 of us) as we are not from a rich family we came here so that atleast we could earn our living but see govt just announced lockdown suddenly and now we are suffering here with no salary,no money to pay house rents,buy our daily needs and no one to help  and not only me but there are thousands of people suffering like me and you are saying spend quality time with your family ,do exercise n eat healthy food stay healthy just imagine how is this possible for a poor people like me ,as an Indian citizens we are even following the
proper ruless of lockdown as well and now we were hoping to that govt will be organised and help us to reach our family but………………and i know most of us are trying to go back home after lockdown  but here comes a tragedy again the flights fair is too high as well yaa those who are rich they can effort  but what about a poor people like me how can we?This is my humble request to our honarable pm Modi and Manipur govt please consider and help us to reach our family and we agree to stay quarantine without any hesitation please helo us we really need your help please….
Sir please open for at aleat private vehicle my wife and two little children stuck in village in uttar Pradesh and very difficult life , I  alone in worry bihar  please issue pass
I am also facing the same my wife and mother in law is locked in small pg room I with my 4 year old kid in Lucknow not getting any help….
Yhh plZ  they should understand..how we r out of home place n even since mid night of 23 rd March til today m stuck in Guwahati in an unknown person’s home….as it’s gonna be 14 th April soo plz .I request them atleast to let us go home who n all r stuck in very critical condition…plzzz
Dear sir I am stuck in mumbai I need to travel to pune we have followed the rules of lock down I have reserved ticket of 15 April
Atleast start the railway services after checking
And thermal scanning allow to travel.
Hello Government of India… I have done train booking For 15 April, will travel with all precautions. Please let us reach home, in stuck in mumbai with my kids. It’s just 3 hours train journey, please allow us to reach back home. My mother in law is on bed rest and my husband is all alone to take care of her. We need each other during this tough phase. Please help and don’t cancel interstate trains. Thank you.
Respected sir, please start atleast airways with all precautions like testing  an all before person enter airport all if testing will be done through rapid test there and there doctors will know who are corona positive… And can send for quarantine…  Please I with my 2 kids are stuck in banglore.  My husband is stuck in village in UP…. Please open the lockdown at least for 2 to 3 days… We are in banglore…  If he comes here he can work from home he is the only who earns  for us… Please after 2 to 3 days can do lockdown till… How much need to extend….
Hello sir .. I’m from Mumbai
. .. I need to go to my parents as my husband doing quarrel and telling to go. .. I have one kid.. .. I booked tickets for may 2….can u pls show pity and give relaxation for 2 days after April 14 so that I go to my parents.  .pls consider my request.. . Pls don’t delay.. .Else no other, way other than suicide. .. Thanks
Dear,
Everyone is going through these tough phase. Holding a breathe and easing the work of government is the best possible to remove this lockdown as soon as possible.. We are already facing so many deaths due to this pandemic and u r telling to suicide..think about ur child ..who like after it., u wouldn’t be there to take her care..to give her the pure love which is only given by a mother, u r such a brave woman u cant quit her life just for the sake of few days. I request you to not to lose hope..things were being managed before ur quarell with husband and so will after u r gone. What u will get..perhaps nothing..and the next person wont regret but the impact will be on ur child. So for at least him hold urself and please be patient in this critical situation. Trust the god everything will b fine with time..but this earth will really miss a brave woman..a strong mother…🙁
Government should allow 2 or 3 days to relaxation of lock down for those who are stuck far away from home. No food no money. Atlest  there should be a hard check up in buses and trains.
Thank you.
Well i cant say i am stucked … I am a working professional …i am working at gurgaon and my home town is jharkhand … I am working from home in gurgaon itself … I want to work from home time since its very difficult for me to cook i hardly know anything to cook i need to purchase fro m swiggy which is not 100 percent safe please allow the people who want to go to their home for their sake … Not for any other people …….
Sir need your help for relaxation 2 to 3 days so that I can go to Kolkata from Cuttack where my family and my paralise mother are suffering.No guardian are not there. I am the only person.please look this matter . Sir I obey the rule and we sure that we will come back back very soon from this crisis.
Hi Team,  am in 35week of pregnancy , I was suppose to travel to my home town from Chennai to managlore(karnataka)  due to lockdown I was not able to travel.. Now I have booked air tickets for my parents on 16th from Banglore to Chennai  and am staying alone with my husband and my 7year old son… I don’t have anyone to take care here.. Am in early stage of pregnancy. Please provide some relax period of 3-5 days and also please allow the flight service which will be very helpful for those in needy.
Request to understand the situation and help the public.
Please allow international flights for those who are stuck here in India , also allow domestic flights for those who have to connect to  international flight only . We are in great distress , I need to travel urgently with my 3 year old daughter to reunite with my family . You don’t even have any idea what we are going through ..kindly open air travel
Sir pls give 1 or 2 days of  relaxation time after April 14th.I want go my native gokarna i stuck up in Bangalore.we are a student we don’t have a money for Survival.
Sir plz give us 2 or 3 days to go back to our home my wife stuck in kolkata n my son is asking about her mumma my son only 6 y old  so plz sir do something for us
I am at kolkata and I need to reach Pune ,I have done my tickets for 16th April. Please allow us to reach our homes and stamp us with quarantine and extend lockdowns. But allow us to be with our loved ones. I am stranded here and I have all my working essential documents at pune ,which is my workplace,I am not being able to work and I fear I might get terminated .kindly help us reach our homes . Please do something
Hello sir,my husband and neice are stucked in Banglore all alone ,due to this lockdown of 21 days,ones their tickets are cancelled. So respecting the lockdown ,we have booked the tickets on 15 th April.So it’s a humble request before suspending any flights post 14 April ,atleast  give 2to 3 days of relaxation .so that people can come to their family in this crisis period.So please sir kinldy consider this request .
sir plz I am stuck in Hyderbad I just wanted to go home after 21 days of Lockdown plz sir just allow us for 3 days in which we can go home plz. The government should inform that it is going to be Lockdown.
Sir please start courier services i have my things stuck there and will damage if i don’t receive them …. Its been 20 days I havent recieved my things bcz of the lockdown so plz start courier services 😭😭
I came to India for some emergency, now stuck here, already lost my job in Canada and we really want to go back to canada,our flight tickets already got cancelled twice now its booked for 18th via Doha. Please open flights for few days with strict precaution and screening like other countries.Its very stressful condition , away from work from family taking toll on mental health.
Please relax the lockdown with strong measures
I am stuck in Bangalore with 2 kids and my husband is stuck in Ap , we have to go back to our house in Hyderabad.request authority to give a 2 days relaxation before the extension of lockdown.
The cyclic way of lockdown is more beneficial , also their is a air and fresh ness in people to fight the disease.
Yes government has to be relax time to go back to there native places. At least for a week. Then let government takes its own time Ajith Hyderabad.
Sir, please give us relaxation of 2 days atleast to reach to my home place in same state. I am satying alone away from family and need to go back . I plead to u.
What we did is just pressed upon a panic button and left people stranded as it is. Let the people move into their respective regions and then shutdown for 2-3 months. Unplanned situation is creating more danger and vulnerablity to people who have been to their workplace city. Think for the people who are out their living their life with limited resources.
Respected , PM Sir, we a group of 6 family members of Kolkata are stranded in a lodge in Jammu since 21 March. All our return tickets have been cancelled.We are maintaining lock down  properly . Plz help us to go back to our home in Kolkata. We have children and elderly person .We are running out of our resources. Plz help us Sir. 🙏🙏🙏Thanking you, Mrs.Kalyani Roy.
Contact no. 8583829181 , 9836649264.
Sir, my pregnant wife (about to complete 8 months) is in Kolkata with her six years old daughter and I am in Kahalgaon (Bihar) since 22/03/2020. Please allow passenger trains services after 14th April,2020 for one or two days between Kahalgaon and Kolkata so that I can attend my wife in her urgent need.
Please relax for 5 days, because migrant people will reach their home towns. Please look into this matter and the most of the truck drivers also stucked due to lockdown. If relaxed for 5 days every people go their home town and will co operate the government rules
Sir please trian chalu kar diyjiye.
I going to kolkata ,
Mumbai me atka hu he.
Mera mom @ papa idhar mumbai me se nehi ja pa raha he.
My children and I are in Chennai and we need to go back to Bangalore to Our family.  Please let us reach our homes.  It’s a humble request.
same here,  my children and I are in Chennai and we need to go back to Bangalore to Our family.  Please let us reach our homes.  It’s a humble request.
Sir now i am in mumbai my hown town Bhubaneswar my coved19 test finish in seven hills. Hospital I need go my house Pls sir
Please allow for two days because we did not have work no salary no food so pls quit lockdown for 2 day only
Please allow for two days because we doesn’t have work no salary no food so pls quit lockdown for 2 days only
Govt has to instruct every  hospital except corana dealt hospitals, to treat special cases like diabetic, cardiac, bp , cancer patients as usual. So many doctors simply closed their practice without any mercinious and humanity to survive  their lives from carona.if doctor or soldiers relaxed from  their duties means,it’s a big mistake.central govt has to bring forcible act to bring back doctors into practice.otherwise so many patients like diabetic,cancer,aids,bp,dialosis will die during this period. Government has to arrange special movement pass to above patients.
Please sir give us relaxation for 1 or 2 days …
To go to our home …because we all are stuck at other place …where there is no supply of food or other things ….plz sir give us relaxation for 1 or 2 days
I am stuck in my PG in Bangalore and my owner is asking me to evacuate because of this Covid-19.
My family is in Kolkata and are deeply worried about what’s gonna happen to me.
I have nobody here and no other place to stay.
Please you should really consider atleast 1 flight or train deported in each route so that those who are locked out of home can also return home.
Otherwise there is no meaning of stay home stay safe.
Plz allow daily labour to go to their native places. So many small scale industries shutdown , simply terminated their  daily labour. Now their reserve funds are exhausted,if continues too many days ,they cannot survive on pavements without food, water and sheltee.these deaths has taken into Corona count
Sir pls give at least 2 days relaxing time. My wife and daughter 7 years old is stuck in jalendhar from last 25 days. Pls aloow them to travel to mumbai.
I request Government officials, Please give us relax time to atleast reach to our hometown. I stuck here in Hyderbad my family is there in Utter Pradesh. If I can have 2 days or even 1 day also I shall be there with my family.  I strongly followed the rule of staying home and Im still following, Im not even going 100 meters away from my house…I only go when I require stuff to eat. The Print please help all of us to reach to our home s
Thanks
Please give 2-3days relaxation to travel with strict regulations…
I have a little suggestion,
Please allow Railways for 4 or 5 days, and make arrangement for only confirmed berths travel, I mean no passenger should be allowed to travel in Unreserved coaches and no waiting list passengers should be allowed in reserved coaches,
Only proper confirmed passenger should be allowed, and also every train has 4 or 5 unreserved coaches, my suggestion is to remove those coaches and in that place add reserved coaches and, in this way there will be no rush in the train, and only those will travel who has been confirmed proper reservations,
This will help at least some people will reach home, safely without any congestion, even I want to see my family in lucknow..Thanks
It’s a very sad stage.where we are away from our family n lost our dear grandfather.we are unable to go home n see him for a last time nor do our final rites.its causing soo much mental depression..ending up in tears n sadness and counting days with some hope of reaching back to family.This lockdown is very much important for the country and we totally respect it .but I really wish the govt should do some facility for people to move in such situations with complete precautions using gloves and masks..a proper test can be done at the airports.. just praying and hoping with whole heart some consideration will be shown to common man’s feelings.
I am shahroz alam working with a private construction company here in HPCL refinary Project Visakhapatnam and my family along with three schooling daughters are in Asansol.
Due to continuing lockdown I am very much disturb full fill day to day family needs so I still here in Vizag to leave Asansol for family so central govt or railway should lift the lockdown four to five days with safety precautions and required test so that I can (thousands like me) meet with the family and help them in this situation. Please help me out.
Dear sir.we are stuck in delhi we want to reach our state kashmir.we have our car our family is missing us in this hour of corona virus.we are suffering  from every side.since one year as your good self know.and also all 4g in kashmir so that students don’t suffer
Sir I am staying alone kindly allow me to go back to my family there also suffering as there are also staying alone and no one is there to take care of them need urgent medication on of the family members having problems in eyes even becoming unable to see. I am staying at Mumbai and my native place is at Kolkata. Please allow me to go back there after necessary medical check done by the airport authority alter lifting the lockdown
The thing is extending lockdown is okay, but till when you will keep on extending. The ones who want to follow will anyway follow, And those who won’t will never follow. As the experts are suggesting, the lockdown can be taken off for- days, and aggain it can be applied. Ultimately it’s said if you’re not happy inside you can’t be healthy too, Hence, people should reach to their family members and loved ones., while maintaining all the restrictions and measures
Agreed on this…
We really need a 2 day relaxation for the stranded people to reach their homes. Many of them are suffering without money and food. We really need this help.from.govt authorities that they sbould not seemlessy extend lock down just to keep their hand high up in public. instead take measures for all those who are suffering. Open this lock down for 2 days after 21 april. When govt wanted us to support for 21 days, we kept quiet. Now we want the support from govt to evacuate us and make every posdible efforts for us to reach our home. Otherwise there will.be no meaning for # stay home stay safe.
Strongly agreed
Please give us two to three days , so that our Daughter is in hostel school will be able to come home . allow bus and train to rune.
We want bring her back to Bangalore from Dhanavur district Tirunelvelly.
Please allow us to reach to native. One or two days allow
Please allow us to reach to native.
Plz sir hamko yaha se nikaliye mere ghar pe meri mother serious condition main hai woh Dialysis patient hai aur mere siwa uska koi sahara nahi sirf 2 din ke liye train aur Aeroplane start kijiye aur sirf unke liye jo migrants hai please i appeal to the government of India
Its a humble request to the Government to allow domestic travels after 14 April atleast for 2-3 days for the family members to unite as they are stranded in different places due to the lockdown…..Please please…..will this reach them?
Please allow the flight service to get functioning for few days myself and my two son away from the family bcz of covid … Even we are worried about the current situation but how can we stay without our family at least consider. We are asking to resume the service to roam around
Namaste sir,
I struck in Hyderabad with my two little kids.  My husband is at Bangalore.  Children wanted to return Bangalore. They are panic. Pl. Alow the trains,  buses,
flights  for atleast 2days.
same here,  my children and I are in Chennai and we need to go back to Bangalore to Our family.  Please let us reach our homes.  It’s a humble request.
Pls relax lockdown for 2 to3 days as i m stuck in Mumbai and my daughter is due for delivery in Karnataka .
Her EDDis 21st April .she is alone there no one to take care of her and this is her 1st delivery.pls help.
Please allow traveling of people who wants to go home.
Hi!
I am from Nashik, Maharashtra to see my ailing father who is in his last stages of life (it was his last wish)Now I am stuck at Jaipur.
Request our Indian Government and my Maharashtra govt to make necessary measures to unite with my family.I respect and appricite the steps taken for the safety of our people. Cosidering the mental status of people,trains flight must start for very few time so people who are stuck in different locations (interstate)must reach safely
I have also been stuck in Karnataka and at least allow me to go to my home.
Please make necessary arrangements to unite with there families stuck at other places
The government should open lockdown for five days so that people those who are stuck in this lockdown in far away places may able to come to their hometown. After that The government may lockdown for another 21 days. It’s my opinion.
Respected sir please think about us my brother is struck in other states plz allow atleast 3 days train resumption so that he can reach his own state…….please sir try to understand the problem…..with prior safety issues the railway can allow the people to come to their own place..
Mei  apne father ko jo apni life ky last stage per hai un ko milne 22April ko Nashik se  Jaipur aayi hu (ye unki last wish thi mujh se)  Request hai ki  Trains , Flights n road transport kisi bhi tariky se hum apne ghar pe pahuch jaye.please interstate traveling ki permission di jaye taki atke log sab apne apne pariwar ky pass pahuch jaye.Mei sarkar ka concern samaj rahi hu ki vo desh ki khatir lockdown extend karne ka vichar kar rahi hai hume manya bhi hai but jo log stuck up hai  unky mental status ka dhyan rakhty hue unhe ghar kaise pahuche us ka arrangement bhi karna atti avayask hai mei bharat Sarkar aur Maharashtra govt se gujarish karti hu ki hamari sahayata kary  aur hum apne ghar jaldi se jaldi pahuche
Dear sir I would like to request that I want to go to Bangalore my small kids are studying in hostle there .There teacher’s are messageing me to take my kids from hostle. IAM here stuck in Delhi because of lockdown .I beg a life of my kids and  I want to go to Bangalore sir please help me.
Respected PM
We are kashmiri students stuck in Indore MP.
We request you to please lift the lockdown for 2 to 3 days. So that we can reach to our home town. We all are ready to remain in qurantine in our own state..
I am struck in gurgaon.due to  lock down , my wife and  my small childrens in Bangalore  plz open the lock down atleast  four days,  after four days no problem to look down  lot of people struck in all over  India they are go there house
Request to government to open flight post April 14 for 2 to 3 days. Me and my family got stuck in other state. Eagerly waiting to return home.
Lockdown was suddenly imposed without giving any chance for shifting to homes. My children along with thousands of other students are stuck in Kota. Crisis of Corona is increasing day by day . Trains must be open at least 2-3 days so that these students as well as lacs of other people may be reached their homes or safe places before extension of present lockdown.
I am 70 and stuck at Mumbai, all my funds are over I have booked return journey to my home at Delhi by August KrantiRajdhani Express  on April 15 and same is confirmed ticket. If GOI extended no trains after 15th April, I will be forced by GOI to live on street Andy’s without food. GOI should understand the plight of senior citizens.
Hi, going through the demand made by many above, w.r.t. permission to go home, it appears that they did not properly understand the extent of threat posed by Corona virus to the mankind.  If you go home traveling from other places, it means you are inviting death to your family, no govt can allow this to happen, so dear bros nd sis, pl stay at the place wherever you are currently, may God bless you all.
Domestic air travel and rail services should be resumed to alleviate the suffering of stranded people.  Thermal screening should be carried out before boarding. Only healthy persons without any symptoms of covid with confirmed reservations should be allowed to travel.
It is regreting that politician become expert of corona instead of scientist doctors and virologist
Stop the Natak and implement the steps as scientific strictly not politically
My son a thalassamia patient also stuck up in Delhi. Medicine also not available due to lockdown. Same patient require blood transfusion at regular interval. At least 2/3 days relaxation may be given, so that all needy people / patient can go to his homeplace to survive.
Namaste !
    I am from Kharagpur.  Its my request to state & central govt.  please allow to those who really need their family support in ths period. we have recently completed our training (Apprentice) in Bhubaneswar. Bt unfortunately the extension of  lockdown, we  get stuck in Bhubaneswar. we are facing problems due to lack of stiphen in ths month.  Our stiphen may also be delayed due to all this …………….So, its my humble  request to our honarable PM…….Sir…..pls provide necessary help & allow us to go our home towns.
Please allow at least 2-3 days after lockdown to allow people who are stuck in different places to move back. At least this can help us.
Call me at eight seven five seven seven five nine four seven four
Please allow 2to3days relaxation to travel to our own place within the state atleast
I request to open lockdown for 2 days flight train so that people can go to there home it’s very much painful suition.I respect ur decison but pls don’t ignore us also
Thousands of cancer patients are roaming in and around Tata memorial hospital, Mumbai. Out patient department has stopped their service except emergency. We also roaming here and there as treatment in hospital is stopped till normalcy. Landlord is pressing daily to vacate and try to enhance rent.  What can we do? Atleast flight or train service kindly be resumed so that we can move to our own state. We are staying here meaningless as no treatment is giving by the hospital.
Please do make  some arrangements to reach our own home towns since we are stucked in other states.
Plz open the all travel routes just for 3-4 days. My husband in valsad he is alone .he could not make food. He is also bp patient. Plz reliease the lowkdown that i goes to valsad Atleast he mentally not disturbed
Please allow train or flight from nadiad to Mumbai ,my daughter is stuck at nadiad ,I am worried , please try to understand our situation ,we are helpless, please
Hiii..I am a hostel student ,stucked in a hostel  in other state so,   please do make some provisions at least train or some other public transportation  system in order  to reach my own hometown   to spend
my  summer vacation with my parents ,brothers ,sisters ,and with my near and dear once.      Thank you…..
It is my humble request to open the train routes for 2 days atleast , I’m student who come to study Kolkata but due to lockdown,stay on rent this time suffering too much difficulty, please help us want to go back to my home
Nisha what problem you are facing ? C you can share with me  I can help you and if you know anyone who is facing any problem in Kolkata do let me know
Break down after 14/april for 3-4 days is inevitable  and again impose, people prepare for it, break down is suggestible, otherwise people stranded become panic as they are food and shelterless now, consider imagining we being in that situation
I came here with my 3 kids and mother in law from bangalore. I m here in mumbai she went to navi mumbai to meet her brothers family . I m struck here in mumbai she is in navi mumbai my husband in bangalore. Govt should try to send people like us to our home town. Govt brought back rich people from foreign countries where risk was so high. And not helping us. The only people who r affected by this lockdown is poor and middle class people. Please start flight train or at least allow private vehicles for us to go. Hope these comments reach to our govt before any decision is made.
We are stuck in Goa and need to get back to the uk pls start up some flights after the 14th April so we can  get home to our families my sister is also not well and needs medication a d medical care
Check uk gov website  there is charterd flight from hethrow to goa im not siure on dated 8th april mumbai , goa , and delhi , 8, 10 , 11 12 . Just check gov.uk
8, 10, 12th goa hethrow chartered flight gov.uk
Flights should be made operative at least for a week so that the persons who are stuck up in other regions can reach home safely. A person residing at his own home can very well obey and adhere to lockdown policy that is of course beneficial for all our Indians. Thanks and Regards
Very poor management
Sorry, this is ridiculous. Why you people don’t think of the persons stranded in other states.  Family is divided from 24th March and fighting lone battle. Foreigners and overseas residents are given priority by providing special flights.
Pl. allow intercity journey by private vehicle as I m stuck in Ahmedabad in my daughter place and at Baroda my husband who is a senior citizen n diabetic patient n his health is also not so good ..not able to cook .. struggling for daily needs .so allow me to go back baroda
Dear Sir, I am stuck in NAVI Mumbai since lockdown. My family is fighting lone battle in Hyderabad with two kids. You people has messed up entire country without proper planning and lack of security in Delhi. The bomb was in Delhi and you have closed entire country.
Now, foreigners and overseas residents are given priority by providing special flights. What about we who stuck in other states.
You are requested to allow people who stuck in other places and shift them to their family places. Then, do whatever you want to.
Dear Modi Ji, KCR Ji, Kejriwal Ji and Thakre Ji, I am stuck in NAVI Mumbai since lockdown. My family is fighting lone battle in Hyderabad with two kids. You people has messed up entire country without proper planning and lack of security in Delhi. The bomb was in Delhi and you have closed entire country.
Now, foreigners and overseas residents are given priority by providing special flights. What about we who stuck in other states.
You are requested to allow people who stuck in other places and shift them to their family places. Then, do whatever you want to.
I appealed to the authority to think about the people stranded different places . I came to my native place (WB) with my family to meet my near& dear (specially mother in law)  for a short period from Bangalore leaving my only daughter there. My return journey planned on 24mar, again planned on 1 Apr both got cancelled due to lock down. I got reservation on 15 Apr again hoping lock down will be withdrawn but if it is extended condition of my daughter will be pathetic. So it is my humble request to the authority that the lock down may be continued but make some arrangements so people like me can go to their respective living places
My self working in pune got stuck in chennai in my native place
Sir, people are stuck across state borders who have come to visit relatives and for other purposes. They are running out of money and resources. Please resume interstate travel for 2 days so people stuck can get back to their home and maintain a peaceful lockdown everywhere.
We all have to urge PMO india to allow 2 or 3days of travel arrangement in a phased manner to all who are struck in different part of the country to be united with their beloved ones. It is unacceptable to call for lockdown unprepared without any exit strategy.
We don’t know what will the situation in the coming days, hence we request GOI to plan an evacuation of people struck in different part of India to their respective native places…Question is you can bring NRI suspected/affected from outside India but can’t allow or give an opportunity to the resident indian to be with their family??double standards??
We all are okay for a measure where All travellers should will be home quarantined for 14days.
First and foremost announcing the lock down of country without prior intimation information and preparation was a great mistake ( like note ban fiasco)
In this Crises  situation one would prefer to be with the family members and take care of them. Nobody can stay away from family’ for more than 2 weeks with sorrow everywhere.
Also, nobody would prefer to go on a jolly trip to visit relatives and places.
So people should be allowed to go back their family members after verifying facts
Hi iam a resident of kerala and i struck at andhrapradesh for past 21 days
Please open the train travel 2 or 3 days I’m stuck in West Bengal so ! Please open the travel
Lockdown is good option to destroy the spread of covid 19 completely, but what about job, how will one survive when company is removing employees and not paying even 15 days salary. There should be complete lockdown for a month, where only 2 hours relaxation be given to buy necessary items daily or provide option of home delivery in red zone areas to prevent spread of covid 19. Kindly take appropriate decision Modi ji.
I stuck in Hyderabad and My family is there in Bangalore, Please allow transportation to work atleast oneday after 14th April. Sothat people can reach their homes
Sir hum pr daya karo aur aap apni trhse best management kr ke travelling suru korlo plz… Iske bad dus saal k liye lockdown kat dena….
Sir, plz do din ke liye hi sahi pr travelling suru karwa do.. sir last four moths mai apni family se dur hu.. ab mere pas koi rasta nahi ..maine bhut try kiya ki mai khudko sambhalu pr yaha itne difficulties aa rahe ki mai rone 😢ke sivay kuch nhi kr sakti.. sir plz hamari problems samjke or traveling ke liye best management kr ke 2 din ke liye hi Sahi pr traveling suru kar do sir aur mere jaise problem wale logo ko shi salamt unke ghar.pohochane do plz… I request you sir  I hope you understand our fellings 😢😢😢😢
plssss open transport at least for 3 to 4 days so we will go to our home.we are students even we don’t have money for survival
I m stuck in chennai and my home is in gurgaon. Plz open the flights. Its difficult to stay alone in hotel in lockdown. Plz open the flights.
Sir,
I have come to bangalore for business purpose on 21st March 2020.
Been stuck here and my family stays back in hyderabad, my 82year Old Father and my family i have too look after..
Been almost 19days now..even for paying accomdation and food its becoming harder…have booked my train ticket online…kindly request youll to open the trains for 3-4days.
So people like me who are stuck in different parts of the country who might be facing same situation like this..
Kindly open the lockdown and let people who need to be with their loved ones…go back.
My Sincere request to PM Modiji kindly look into this issues which is very important and serious.
Hope i and people like me get to go home
To the attention of GOI.  Please allow at least for 2 days after 14th April.  My daughter is at Nagpur, after resigning her job. She has booked a flight ticket for 16th April. Kindly relax for at least 2 days for people to go to their respective places.
No body is even bothered and wants to understand the difficulty of the people. We have to reach our home sand we need necessary arrangements. Please open the railways and Airways for couple of days and let people travel. I need to reach my home in Chennai and government has to answer to our plight.
Please make open for 2-3 days only . People stranded in other states.
My son along with 300 other students are stranded in Mauritius. Kindly allow these kids who went for internship to retur. Their hometown
I m also stuck in chandgarh. I m from himachal pradesh. Please open it for 1-2 days.
Sir we respect your decision but what about those who are stuck outside their homes …pls allow trains for 1 or 2 days so that we can reach home ..m stuck in jammu want to go back to delhi
To contol the virus it will be benefited that no interstate movements be allowed till further the disease controlled only relaxes on agricultural medicine and essential commodities,
Sir we struck in Visakhapatnam  and we are  from Kharagpur,  so please grant atleast permission to go home, u have capable to take people from Italy to India then we r in India.  If u wont give permission to the people who struck like us .then ur government only care about rich not middle class  . u gave a rule without any intimation after that also we followed but now u should have to give permanent
Sir I’m medical officer stuck in Mumbai with my kids at my mom’s home.my husband is in Kanpur.i m posted at Kanpur.sir plz open trains or flghts
Dear sir,
We respect your orders but we request to reopen the services such as railway or Airways for two to three days so that Students who are stuck in some other countries can reach their home.
Thank you
Situation, after the lockdown is lifted, will go out of control if transportation is opened. Movement from one place to another will see massive spread of the virus. Hence, I don’t support any movement or a break of even a single day after 14 April.
It is right, but let us think  about who are stranded for more than 20 days outside from their places with kids patients and aged people, if allowed transportation for 2 to 3 days by strictly implementing rules and penalti-es, may be better choice
आदरणीय प्रधानमंत्री जी मै आपसे विनती करता हू की  ४ से ५ दिन के लिये LOCKDOWN हटा कर सबको अपने घर, या जहा कही जाना हो ,या जो भी कुछ खरिदना हो, ऐसे कुछ अती आवश्यक काम करणे की अनुमती दे . उसके बाद आप corfue भी लगा दे, तो इसका नातिजा अच्छा ही आयेगा औ र सभी लोग नियमो का पालन कर सकते हैं ! आपका बहुत बहुत धनयवाद .
जय हिंद जय भारत जय महाराष्ट्र .
Respected sir please give a relaxation for 2 days it least so that people that stuck away from they home can reach back we are also stuck away from home.
Pl allow break in lockdown for 5 days to reach native place by public transport with reserved accommodation, domestic flights , own transport.
i am stuck in tripura and i want to go back to my family in kolkata..please help me
please open domestic flights for2or 3 days i m stuck in punjab m from mumbai please help
People stuck at various places. Gov should allow them to reach their home.
Dear sir,
         We respect your orders but we request to reopen the services such as railway or Airways for two to three days so that people who are stuck in some other places can reach their home.
              Thank you
Plz open the all travel routes just for 3-4 days. My husband in delhi he is alone .he could not make food. He is also debatis patient. Plz reliease the lowkdown that i goes to delhi… Atleast he mentally not disturbed
I came to Bangalore to see my father as my father was in ICU due to some critical health issues . I got struck in Bangalore from last 21 days . My family is in Hyderabad and they are struggling to do their regular activities and my humble request to start flights from Bangalore to Hyderabad at least couple of day’s from 25tj April .
Plz Don’t open lockdown there is a huge chances of viruses spread..plz stay home be safe..
Sir, we were struck in Lodge from last 18 days. We came Visakhapatnam for mother-in -law funeral rituals n we   are unable to pay lodge rents. If we are allowed for 2days to our home town, we may sustain as per govt.  rules.
I came to vizag, due to my mother surgery and I stuck up here for this covid lockdown, my husband is in bangalore.pls permission to travel after 14 the April so I can stay with family.
Some body say that lets the situation under control then only the  train and flight service hve to function. Yes i agree but it might take two to three month to take control of the situation. But those who stuck in difference part of our coutry. They csn, t servive for that much of long periods, some are very critical situation. So event i. M stuck here from the last 20 day. Without money. And  nothing.. So lets most of the people our citizens re relocate their own respective place and home than only if you want to lockdown fir two month or three month we can do that also.. But we are going to follow the government rule like social distances. Wearing mask or whatever that measure to protect other s from virus.. Otherwise people will stars dying of hunger., heart attack.. Or any others related  diseases..
Hi.. I am from delhi and stucked in pune with my 2 kids and parents  at my sis place..they already are 4 members and we have shortage of money and resources..  I request you to give relief for 3 to 4 days  after 14th April so that we can reach our native place..My husband is with my in laws in Delhi..and my mother is diabtic and BP patient ..and she is not able to work without help and as you know maids are also not coming..pls pls help.us to reach our home
My husband has been stucked in Hyderabad he is also suffering from calamity without money and food pls help him to come back to West Bengal pls Indian government pls help him
Lockdown is only way to lower covid 19 cases. I am stuck in Surat, my native place is West Bengal. I can sacrifice to show my “Deshbakti” Inspire of many difficulty. I only request government to plan regarding lockdown as my return reservation was on 22nd March( in train) & 25th March in flight both the journey was cancelled. I have done my return reservation on 15th April that to via Mumbai. I am unable to do my planning as government are unable to take any definite decision.
Kindly allow the flights To fly as my daughter is stuck in Kerala where she had gone to appear her final year exam.   She have booked her ticket for 17th April.   Please give a break to lock down so that the people who are stuck can atleast reach their destination.
Extension of lockdown beyond 14 Apr is wellcom steps to complete eradicate the Covid 19.
Sir hum mumbai mai hai plz hamku odisha jana hai plz help karu 2.3 din keliye train & flight chalu kijiye sir plz plz
Anyone who wants to step outside for travel with a valid reason can take required permission online and after the approval is given, a QR Code is sent as an SMS which can be used to show the police if you are stopped in the middle while travelling. Remember to start travel after approval and also wear masks when outside. Speak calmly and politely when asked details. Thanks
Can you tell me from where can we get the online query registration ? For travel purpose
My son could not come back to Karnataka Belgaum on the last of stopping domestic  because his flight got cancelled from Bhuvaneshwar and he stayed back as he had to catch another flight from Hyderabad I want him to come back home so much anxiety and agony for a mother away from a child during this out break if you could understand please give a gap for all the stranded people to return to their hometowns then no tensions untill we are virus free please please consider and give time before 2nd lockdown Make a rule that all passengers are quarantined once they reach their home town for a week at least
Hello, I read ur post about getting permission and QR code for travelling. Actually my neice is stucked in Pune, she is 8 years only. She was studying in a hostel there. Suddenly the hostel authorities called n said to pickup the child n as I stay in Hyderabad I told my friend in Pune to pick my neice from the hostel. Now the girl is crying for her mom. If u could give some details on the travelling procedure I will try to get it all done. Thanks
Please let me know the procedure i would like to travel from Belgaum to Pune .. 
My native place is belgaum i work in Pune .. i came to my place for some personal work & stuck here due to sudden lockdown announcement … and i just got to know the news that my mother in law health is not good because she has undergone kidney transplant ion … since it is very emergency i have to be there in this situation with her only husband is in hospital … is there any procedure or ways you can see so that i can go to Pune ?
Lockdown is good decision but gov should over those whose obey rule of lockdown but unfortunately these kind people struck in between their home let gov arrange to reach there destination then lockdown till it’s end  otherwise they will die without corona    we are one of them
My wife sunita chhetri from nepal she works in government department, Birgunj, last month she had come to bangalore were me and my two sons stay, she has to go back to nepal, please advice how it is possible.
Please allow 2 days of relief for domestic flights so tat ppl like me stuck in different places can go back many of us LL lose our jobs and exams bcos of this pls allow 2 days relief for domestic flights we LL take all precautions to contain the infection.
I think lockdown should continue till the situation is under sufficiently control. People stranded away from their hometown in different parts of the country should report to the respective local authorities  where they are housed now. Respective state Government and local authorities like corporation, panchayat etc  should contact them for helping those people to meet their daily needs till withdrawal of lockdown at a subsidized rate or free of cost.
For the good of all Flight, train and inter-state transportation should be suspended though lockdown is lifted. Those stranded should be care by their concern state government and the government where they are stranded.
Lot of people are struck thousand kilometers  away with out money or food . Calamity can strike anytime but abrupt decision and to continue with it without full feed back will be catastrophic. Only reserved coaches should be allowed in long distance routes .flight can be permitted for 5 days ,but after 22 April we must seal the hotspots with complete lockdown for 14 days more .A relaxation after April 15 for 5 days needed  people to reach back home ,repair the vechiles of people.,have haircuts ,store food .Religious gatherings ,marriage, entertainment, sports can be postponed for 30 days.
Please kindly allow travel to native places as am away from home town and family members since 2 months due to lockdown mental stress we promise to the govt once we reach our homes we stay in home please kindly allow relaxation for 2 or 3 days atleast for travel to our destination homes
But how to discriminate you from other people and also chances of getting infection during travel are there and further spreading also
I m stuck in delhi.my mom is cancer patient and father heart patient are alone in Dehradun.please allow me to travel to my home to take their care .
I came to Kuwait for short time assignment and got stuck up here, due to short time assignments I left my family alone with small kid. Here in Kuwait they have suspended all flights before India close the border, that is one more reason I got stuck up here. At this crucial time my family is too much panic and they need my presence in India. So here I kindly request allow the flights with minimal operations with all safety control measures and I am ready to follow all the guidelines from government. One more thing I would like to tell here, when the people stay where they are comfortable and happy the body immunity also will be good, now I am out of family and thinking too much on that and it causing me lot of health issues. My humble request please give option to travel back to mother country please please.
Thanking you
Manukumara B S
My son supriyo das was stuck up at mumbai Airoli. He was working with an IT company and he resigned from his job in the month of january,2020. His release date was 3rd april. Company released him .he got a job in kolkata where he supposed to join on 16th april . He was in home (P.G) since 16th march as a status of wirking from home for his earlier company . He has given the ultimatum to his PG land lord till 15th april. Now question is if he cant move from mumbai from kolkata to residence he will be deep derp trouble . Govt must see and consider these cases seriously . Please allow flight in jenuine cases for 2 to 3 days and allow the passengers after verfiying his status , health by local authority, airport authority also
Who ever stuck in india, gov should help them to go back respective place. Gov should ensure public should get groceries and provision .
Thank you so much don’t open it any soon. I am a keraliate we really don’t understand why these many cases are reported in other parts of India, if they had strictly followed the lockdown and measures suggested by Indian government from March 1.. so please don’t open unless it comes to 0, people are senseless here. Don’t ever open airline until this pandemic is over world wide …. Can’t again go to lockdown once more and repeat this cycle
It is a problem of people who struck outside the places of their native. On strict restrictions they may be allowed to go as govt transported other nationals who are struck in india
Relexation for 5 days to be given for evacuvation purposes. People should be allowed to travel back to their homes after throughly reviewing their proof of identity and proof of residence. People who have got struck at wrong places out of their home need to be given a considerate view, otherwise it is going to do more damage than benefit. We dont need to follow all or none principle here, lockdown is for people its exceptions should be their for the people.
Respected Sir/Madam
What about the workers who do jobs in private firms in Delhi-NCR now we are work less how we survive without salary we have nothing to earn from anywhere.
As far as testing facilities are concerned, it is found that theses are not adequate ss seen from the growing cases. In Kurnool District of AP, testing facility seems unavailable as seen from the information in Jio app. If the information is correct, I request earnestly that a Testing Centre gets started  immediately in Kurnool to do the needful..
Hi
I think railway should give 2-3 days to move people for his safe place and take decision to allow only 72 people in one sleeper coach.
One person per birth should be allowed during this time.
No waiting should be allowed till relaxation period.
Even I HV also waiting ticket but if my waiting will be not clear then I will be not travel.
Me and wife Stuck at Jaipur since 20 th March Lockdown should be lifted for 5 days. Let people who are stuck travel to their home by verifying their Correct Address on the railway tickets of address proof.
If our comments on this post has some value, then please put a public appeal to the govt. to allow 2 or 3 days travel only after rigorous screening and strict precautionary measures like mandatory mask for all. But govt. should think about relocating people back to homes and then extend the lockdown for required time.
My wife is struck in her mother’s house she is crying a lot to come.plz do atleast for one day.
Even my husband is stuck alone in a place called KORAPUT in Odisha. He can’t come back to me to Bhubaneswar. He is all alone there and am all alone here. And my cash is going to be over soon and I don’t have NetBanking and all.
I need medicine for my mother dt I take from Chennai they will send it by courier bt due to lockdown we r unable to get..bt need it urgently
Spread of virus is alarming  admist of precautionary measures.  I believe Flights and cab ,like uber ,ola ,easycab may open by 22 nd with fewer flights and trains can resume from 30th of April and full flight services can resume from 2 may onwards .But religious gathering, schools ,colleges, marriage functions, entertainment, sports , can only be allowed after may 15 .we still need rapid tests and monitoring of local public. Duty hours should vary from 7.30 am to 11 am and ending by 3 pm to 7 pm to different sectors ,shops , companies ,banks and established institutions.
Please don’t tell about airlines …. Don’t want to go back again to the lockdown process once more . . You control here in india you stay here within the country
Lifting the lockdown and resuming flights, rail and road transportation even for a day or two would be such catastrophic, India can’t afford such misadventures. When it comes of safeguarding the interests of a larger population, a few who are stuck up need to get prepared for some sacrifices. This is an extraordinary situation after all. Any humanitarian approach on this account would be counter humanitarian for majority of the population. Please extend the lockdown till the period situation comes under control…
Sir, with due respect I would like to put forward one question. Are you saying that the people stranded at different locations should be left there only? Or is it better to open the transportation but limiting the passengers and taking rigorous precautionary measures. But what I am able to see that you are uprightly proposing to neglect even the few.
Even  I go with your concern !
True govt should evacuate or lift the ban fr three days to let the genuine people reach their homrs
How can one say not to lift the lockdown for few days. This is absolutely meaningless. Many innocent people are struck in different places due to no fault of theirs. And some struck with no money and other health issues.
Without any second opinion, they should relax for a couple of days, without compromising on crucial aspects.
This is utmost important
With few saying flights will be operating few it won’t who to trust? We should allow emergency domestic flights to operate atleast . People are stuck people need to go back destination people need to get emergency medical assistance what will happen to those cases. I am sure if this much you can do for citizens by making sure everybody uses  mask glouse and sanitizers during travel then what should we all expect ? We need to make sure it does not spread but we need to make sure people don’t die due to emergency also
Flights are the culprits behind this pandemic…..if it spreads in community then lakhs together people will die.,,,,,,worst situation will arise….. people are bothered of there own problems……. patients can be treated any nearest big cities…..for example not necessarily patient in tamilnadu should fly to Mumbai……within state patient can be moved….
Definitely the lock down should continue..but the retail shops, vegetable markets and grocery stores should be allowed to function with a social distance conditions…further the daily wage earners and unorganized services workers livelihood should also taken into consideration..
Due to this Lockdown me n my baby are stucked in boisar at my relative’s  home. I came here 1 month back, I want to go back to my home in bhopal.
So its my kind request to you and the government to shutdown the lock down atleast for 2 or 3 days so that we can travel to our home by flight after doing proper screening and medical test .
Thanking you,
A three to five days of  relaxation is required so people can reach there respective homes so that then if there is a complete lockdown again then at least the people who are stranded at different points moving from there and only those should be allowed to travel who are going to there places in those three to five days…
I migrated to Bangalore from my Home Town for job and in these tough days of COVID 19 crisis, I lost my job and right now I am jobless and I have 3 dependants on me. Can’t stay/live in a city like Bangalore without any source of income . Therefore we want to go back to our hometown where we can live happily. Hence request you/the government to atleast allow the air travel after 14th April for 2-3 days. During these 2-3 days many people like us who are stuck in different places and willing to go back to their home will get a relief and this will reduce the cost (a huge burden) on any individual in these crisis. Do all required screening at portbof exit and entry (airport), I believe all our airports are well equipped with scanners to trace the virus.
Thanks!
Locals railways of Mumbai & Pune should continue lock down till the covid19 cases come to normalcy. Intrastate 🚆 may allowed after 14 April onwards to run beyond locked down area.work from home to be continued till the normalcy.
Transfers i.e.also mutual and request too banned for two years.
In fact the decisions taken by the GOM, are quite genuine acceptable and appreciable.
There should be some break to any activity to continue. People who are stranded outside their places should first be evacuated relaxing 3-4 days locking period after 14/april then impose. Door delivery of essentials be made available
Respected sir/madam
I know the situation is too worst.
But what’s the use of opening lock down if there is no transportation.
We r suffering staying out of our home town
Kindly grant a 2 or 3 days transportation so that we can travel safe to our house
A sudden lock down for 21 days n then again if it extends it’s too hard to survive without food and shelter
It is absolutely necessary to continue with total lock down as this will minimise spread of deadly corona virus.This is crucial time and if any laxity is our fellow citizens are going to misuse it, so please don’t hesitate at this point .
Hi,
Respected to every one,
                   I am Swetha from Delhi . Regarding of job me and my friend came from Delhi to Ahmedabad.(Gujrat).so we are working here in one of the Pvt Ltd company,so due to of this lockdown we stuck here,so what our government as taken the decision of lockdown for 21days till April 14th ,it is very good because atleast cases are less in this lockdown ,but after 14th please kindly I am requesting you and the government to shutdown the lock down atleast for 2 or 3 days so that we can travel to our native after doing the medical test and check up .please it is a request from all that who are stucked like this in different places without money and everything .so please do the favour to each and every citizen who is in need of this lock out from the government .
                                 Thanking you,
                                                                 Yours obediently,
                                                                 P.krishna Swetha.
The decision of extending the lock down is very pathetic for those who are far away from their home  Atlest some measures should be taken for people who are away from their home so that they reach home safely. I am stuck in kolkata since a month now. I want to reach Mumbai asap. I urge my utmost request to take some steps so that at least the people who are away from their home can reach home safely. Atleast start the flight service or rail service for those who are away from home, the police officials can stay with such people till they reach home,  so even if someone is affected measures can be taken then and there. Please do not stop the rail and air services after 14th April
There is a shortage of daily foods like Maida,  Dettol, biscuits, Maggi etc. In some areas of Maheshtala, South 24parganas, West Bengal
What about medical and engineering COLLEGE
