IAS officers upto joint secy level in central govt get blanket extension for ‘continuity’
New Delhi: The Narendra Modi government Tuesday extended the tenures of all IAS and other civil services officers working as deputy secretaries, directors and joint secretaries with the central government up until 30 June 2020.
Sources said the unprecedented decision to hand out a blanket extension to all officers working at this level is to ensure there is continuity in execution of tasks as the country battles the Covid-19 pandemic.
“This is a very crucial time for the government as well as the country,” said a senior official in the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT). “The government needs to be prepared for a long battle in the aftermath of the lockdown, and it cannot afford officers familiar with the tasks at hand leaving, and new one replacing them…That is why such a blanket step has been taken.”
The decision was communicated through an office memorandum issued on 7 April.
“The Appointments Committee of the Cabinet has approved the extension of tenure (except on completion of tenure/extended tenure on superannuation) of all the officers working as Deputy Secretary/Director/Joint Secretary or an equivalent level (appointed under the Central Staffing Scheme) and completing their regular/extended tenure between the period 25.03.2020 to 30.04.2020 for a period up to 30.06.2020, or until further orders, whichever is earlier,” reads the memorandum. ThePrint has seen a copy of the document.
The official quoted above said the decision has been taken only up till the joint secretary level since there are lots of cases of superannuation at the additional secretary and secretary levels, and the government does not want to include them in the blanket extensions just yet.
Also read: Why Indian banks could make the Covid-19 economic crisis only worse
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
With the 21-day nationwide lockdown being expected to end on 14 April, all ministries have been asked to come up with plans on the course of action to be taken once the lockdown ends.
“Right now, there is a lot of focus on how to restart after the lockdown is over,” said another DoPT official. “At such a time, there has to be continuity.”
“Also, in case there is phased lifting of the lockdown, with some people still working at home and all, it would be doubly hard to have new people take over…So this move was much needed — at a time like this routines and protocols can be suspended with in the interest of the country,” the official added.
Also read: Aap chronology samajhiye: Did Modi buckle under Trump’s pressure on HCQ for COVID-19?
