Heard Charles took Ayurveda treatment: Minister seeks evidence-based AYUSH drugs for Covid-19
New Delhi: The Union Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH) has sought proposals from alternative medicine practitioners for possible coronavirus treatment but all claims will be vetted by a team of scientists, AYUSH Minister Shripad Yesso Naik said. Speaking to ThePrint, he mentioned how some doctors told him Prince Charles who had tested positive for coronavirus was “treated by Ayurveda and homoeopathy”.
“The Prime Minister had recommended that the ministry should work towards scientific evidence-based solutions from the AYUSH system to keep a check on the spread of the pandemic,” Naik told ThePrint from Goa Wednesday. “We have set up a channel and are requesting all AYUSH practitioners, institutes, associations, to send their suggestions and
proposals that will be scrutinised by a group of scientists. This will help in fighting the coronavirus.”
Naik further said the ministry was concerned by unsupported claims being made by many that they could treat the coronavirus, adding strict action would be initiated against
those spreading such messages.
“There are reports that even Prince Charles who tested positive for coronavirus was treated by Ayurveda and homoeopathy. Some doctors have informed me about it though I don’t have proof for it. So, we need to support our technique with scientific claims so that it can be used widely,” he said.
Explaining how the ministry has already started taking the help of video conferencing and social media to reach out to AYUSH practitioners and involve them in putting an end to unsupported claims, Naik said it will be further strengthened in the coming few days.
The idea is to get these suggestions based purely on scientific explanations that could help restrain the spread of coronavirus, or to manage the disease, Naik added.
As of Thursday morning, India has 1,764 active Covid-19 cases.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Naik said his ministry had requested the Prime Minister and the government to provide them an opportunity to use the AYUSH system (alternative medicine) to treat patients.
Naik said he also discussed with academia, the industry and his ministry officials on promoting AYUSH therapies in fighting Covid-19. “Minister of Commerce and Industry Piyush Goyalji was also present in the meeting, apart from doctors and representatives from the industry,” he added.
Asked about the circulars that the ministry had issued to combat coronavirus and later withdrawn them due to criticism, Naik said they had only clarified that the measures suggested by AYUSH were preventive in nature.
“The circulars were reissued with a bit of a clarification that whatever was suggested by the ministry to tackle coronavirus was preventive in nature,” the minister said. “As far as treatment is concerned, we are going to highlight such measures that can be proven scientifically and have already started work on them.”
The minister also said the AYUSH treatment can come handy in villages where people have been making use of Ayurveda for years.
On 31 March, the minister issued a statement recommending “self-care guidelines for preventive health measures and boosting immunity with special reference to respiratory health”. The ministry said these guidelines are “supported by Ayurvedic literature and scientific publications”.
The recommendations included daily practice of Yoga and meditation, and use of turmeric, cumin, Coriander and garlic in cooking for general good health, and consumption of Chyavanprash, herbal tea to boost immunity.
Also read: Modi govt again advises homoeopathy for COVID-19, suggests sipping water boiled with tulsi
 
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
You are reading this because you value good, intelligent and objective journalism. We thank you for your time and your trust.
You also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. It is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay-cuts hitting the industry. There are many reasons why the media’s economics is broken. But a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism.
We have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. We also have the country’s most robust editing and fact-checking team, finest news photographers and video professionals. We are building India’s most ambitious and energetic news platform. And we aren’t even three yet. 
 At ThePrint, we invest in quality journalists. We pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. As you may have noticed, we do not flinch from spending 		whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. Our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. You can check some of it here.
This comes with a sizable cost. For us to continue bringing quality journalism, we need readers like you to pay for it. Because the advertising market is broken too.
If you think we deserve your support, do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair, free, courageous, and questioning journalism, please click on the link below.   Your support will define our journalism, and ThePrint’s future. It will take just a few seconds of your time.
Support Our Journalism 
I m layman but if we use red chincona band black chincona result may be marvoloush
SOME   SEARCHLIGHT   ON  WAY  OUT  OF  COVID-19   PRESENTLY   TORMENTING  MANKIND.
According  to  news  reports  published  on  7 April  2020  ,   scientists  have  found  a  trial  drug  that  effectively  blocks  the  cellular  door  SARS-CoV.2  uses  to  infect  its  hosts .  This  is  expected  to  provide  a  potential  treatment  for  the   Coronavirus.  An  European  company  is  likely  to  test  the  drug  soon.  The  study   ,  published  in  the  journal  Cell  ,  provides  news  insights  into  SARS-CoV-2  ,  the  virus  that  causes  COVID-19.    In  this  context  ,  it  may  be  relevant  for  readers  to  know  this  Vedic  astrology  writer’s   predictive  opinion.  Last  year  2019  ,  during  October  to  December  ,  this  writer  had  covered  India  ,  Singapore  ,  Japan  ,  Italy  ,   Canada  ,  Ireland  and  the  U.S.A.  for  purpose  of  yearly   2020   predictive  alerts  ,  separately   for   each  country.     One  major  predictive  alert  ,   common  to  all  the  aforesaid  countries  ,  had  covered   the  period  of  about  three  and  a  half  months  from  mid-March  to  June  in  2020.  It  looked  to  be  a  period  testing  ‘ patience’   and  ‘ perseverance’    of  the  people  through  a  variety  of  major  worrisome  concerns.  In  some  cases  ,  it  was  specified  to  be  relating  to  health  woes   or  health  hazards  involving  digestive  system  ,  nervous  system  ,  sex    ,  respiratory   system  in  the  body  and  the  like.  But  beyond  June  ,  from  July  to  October    ,  in  2020  ,  this  writer  had  predicted  of  ‘ change  of  weather’   or   at  least   a  time  that  could  address  the  woes  of  the  immediate  past.   So  reading  in  between  the  lines  ,  it  can  be  said  that  some  effective  drug  or  remedy  can  arrive   by  mid  or  towards  last  week  of  June  2020  to  provide  some  relief  during  July  to  September  ,  2020  ,  to  some    good  extent.  But  the  need  to  be  alert  does  not  come  to  a  stop  here.  Complacency  can  have  tendency  of  re-appearance  during   October-  December  2020.  So  continued  vigilance  may  pay  some  dividends.  One  more  alert  prediction  here   for  exercising  more  care  and  appropriate  strategy.   A  period  of  nearly  one  and  a  half  month   from  mid-April  to  31 May   in  2021  ,    particularly   last  eleven  days  of  May  2021  would  call  for  more  alertness  and  appropriate  strategy.  In  the  absence  of  alertness  and   appropriate  strategy  ,  COVID-19  can  re-emerge  with   greater   strength  and  mischief   in  vulnerable  most   parts  of  the  world.  The  planetary  impact  appears  to  be  prone  to  suggest  another  reading   of  planetary   impacts  during    mid-April  to  31  May  in  the  coming  year  2021    –     full-fledged  war  somewhere  ,  could  even  be  something  most  dreaded  WW3   besides   crisis  in  economy  ,  trade  and  food  sectors.     For  more  precision  as  regards  countries  which  may  likely   get  involved,  this  writer  has  in  mind  to  go  into   further  details  while   figuring  out  yearly  predictive  alerts   for  some  countries  towards  September  -October  2020  ,  covering  2021.
Note : – Note  :-  This  writer  had    similarly  alerted ,  much  prior  ,     countries  like  India  ,  Japan  ,   Italy  ,  Canada  ,  US  ,  and  Ireland.  Some  links  are  being  given  here  ;
1.	The  United  States   ,    wisdom-magazine.com/Article.aspx/5176/     having  predictive  alerts  submitted  on  11  November  2019   by  this  writer  to  the  editor  for  publication.  These  were  published  on  1 January  2020.
2.	Italy   ,  http://www.astralis.it/Kumar02.htm    published  on   15 December  ,  2019.
3.	Canada  ,  article  – “ Coming  year  2020  for  Canada  in  Vedic  astrology  view”  – brought  to  public  domain  widely  on  28 November  to  30  November  2019.
4.	Singapore ,  article  – “Some  glimpses  of  coming  year  2020   for  Singapore ”  – brought  to  public  domain  widely  on  3rd November  2019.
5.	Japan  ,   article  -“  Vedic  astrology  highlights  for  Japan  in  coming  year  2020”  –  brought  to  public  domain  last  year  2019  on  23  and  24 October.
6.	Ireland  ,  article  –  “  Planetary  indications  for  Ireland  in  2020”  –  brought  to   public  domain  widely  on  12  January  ,  2020.
7.	this  Vedic  astrology  writer’s   predictive  alerts  in  article  –  “  Predictions  for  coming  year  2020  by  kushal  kumar”  –   published  last  year  2019   on  10 October   at   theindiapost.com/articles/predictions-for-coming-year-2020-by-kushal-kumar/.
Shripad Yesso Naik and AYUSH are against whenever it does not suit their beliefs.
This is Shripad Yesso Naik Vs. Nobel laureate Venkatraman Ramakrishnan
https://www.hindustantimes.com/india/homeopathy-astrology-are-bogus-says-nobel-laureate-venkatraman-ramakrishna/story-oNNzWBnosMFiLnrnmfkdxI.html
https://thewire.in/government/ayush-ministry-homeopathy-false-propaganda
This is what happens when you put people like Yesso Naik in charge who know nothing about science. They will even argue with Nobel Laureates stating settled science based on thousands of studies – Homeopathy does not work in even a single disease.
Corporates r hiding truth aaa cinco na bark had been intaking for malaria by indegenous people of latin america  aaa they copied and earned millions of dollars by quinine pills aaa  many resmidies for corona  in siddha system ..decoction of ginger
Glove turmeric lemon will cure corona..
Six doses enough..  we r using  4.4 2020
There are two type f benefits. One is short term and another long term.  Allopathic Medicine are base on on instant relief, which also causes several side effects. But Ayurvedic, Homeopathic or Unanai Medicine are based on natural science and its effects are long lasting without any side effects. But today’s generation……….,,,,,?
Alternative medicine can never be evidence based. I dare any of these quacks to show that their concoctions work in a blinded cross over RCT that is peer reviewed. We don’t practice ancient astronomy but people want ancient medicine. Utter madness.
Tablet fifatrol aimil 2 bd……. limcee 1 bd…… fdc d3  alternative days….. simple hot water steam four times……. Redlabel natural care tea four times…… plenty of luke warm water…. ok
This is fake news, I request to The PRINT , you are prestigious you tube channel and news website, you should check authenticity of this news. Kindly don’t spread fake news. As it is very much rumour in all over India. The spoke person of prince Charles office denied of taking  any such ayurvedic treatment by prince charles for treatment of covid 19. Thank you
There is a difference between alchemy and chemistry, astrology and astronomy and alternative medicine and evidence based modern medicine.
Ayurved treatises were rewritten several times completely and then after Muslim invasion this revision stopped. Now it has become obsolete. There is no science in it.
Fake sciences are harmful and should be banned.
Can you show the source of your information that Ayurved treatise were rewritten multiple times and stopped after muslim invasion?
Did people stopped falling ill after muslim invasion?  If not,were they taking allopathic medicine?  Ayurvedic is deep rooted in indian food habits.. It cannot be eliminated by invasions.. Have you ever used Ayurvedic medicines before commenting like an authority on this subject?
Taking Ayurvedic medicines does not make you any more of an expert on Ayurveda than using a computer makes you a computer scientist.
Ayurveda is based on beliefs on humors.  All pre-scientific medicine did this, including western traditional medicine. Ayurveda has no concept of microbiology. Ayurveda does not even know how the body works, let alone disease.
Food habits are food habits. Don’t call it medicine. If you get malaria or cholera, changing diet and fasting won’t cure it any better than chance.
The government should use this opportunity to do a proper double-blind study of ayurvedic and homeopathic cures using volunteer patients. In any case, modern medicine also is searching in the dark. Let us make use of this opportunity to validate alternatives also. AYUSH should fund such studies and professors trained in these methods of research should be included in the team apart from doctors fromt he respective dsciplines.
You mean reports like this based on thousands of studies? There are about 2500 studies on Homeopathy alone and it is well proven that these so-called alternative medicines are not actually medicines. Are you an AYUSH “doctor”? In that case, you are not a real doctor.
1. ‘The principles of homeopathy contradict known chemical, physical and biological laws and persuasive scientific trials proving its effectiveness are not available.’
Russian Academy of Sciences
2. ‘Homeopathy should not be used to treat health conditions that are chronic, serious, or could become serious. People who choose homeopathy may put their health at risk if they reject or delay treatments for which there is good evidence for safety and effectiveness.’
National Health and Medical Research Council, Australia
3. ‘These products are not supported by scientific evidence.’
Health Canada
4 “Homeopathic remedies don’t meet the criteria of evidence based medicine.”
Hungarian Academy of Sciences
5. ‘The incorporation of anthroposophical and homeopathic products in the Swedish directive on medicinal products would run counter to several of the fundamental principles regarding medicinal products and evidence-based medicine.’
Swedish Academy of Sciences
6. ‘We recommend parents and caregivers not give homeopathic teething tablets and gels to children and seek advice from their healthcare professional for safe alternatives.’
US Food and Drug Administration
7. ‘There is little evidence to support homeopathy as an effective treatment for any specific condition.’
National Centre for Complementary and Integrative Health, US
8. ‘There is no good-quality evidence that homeopathy is effective as a treatment for any health condition.’
National Health Service, UK
9. ‘Homeopathic remedies perform no better than placebos, and the principles on which homeopathy is based are scientifically implausible.’
House of Commons Science and Technology Committee, UK
10. ‘Homeopathy has not definitively proven its efficacy in any specific indication or clinical situation.’
Ministry of Health, Spain
11. ‘There is a constant increase in the quantity of evidence and the conviction of the scientific community in medicine, that homeopathy should be treated as one of the unscientific methods of so-called “alternative medicine”, which proposes worthless products without scientifically proven efficacy.’
National Medical Council, Poland
12. ‘From a purely clinical perspective, the fact remains that there is no valid empirical proof of the efficacy of homeopathy (evidence-based medicine) beyond the placebo effect.’
Federaal Kenniscentrum voor de Gezondheidszorg, Belgium
Really it’s an appreciation  that prince charles  trusts our alternate medicine ayurvefa.
I am a Homeo practitioner with more than 30 years of experience.  In my opinion, Homeo medicine Ars.Alb.30 and 200 will be useful as preventive.
‘ In general, Ars Alb 200- 4-6 globs once daily only in the morning should be taken on 3 consecutive days. For children, 2-3 globs should be similarly given. In places where the drinking water is not really clean, a little edible camphor can be mixed with the water to prevent infection. this can be used throughout the year. Other medicines may be used according to the indications in any particular case.
I have taken ars alb 30 on 3 consecutive days as recommended by ayush Mantralaya. Is that fine
