Can’t trust Huawei as China risked world’s health with coronavirus: RSS affiliate leader
New Delhi: RSS affiliate Swadeshi Jagran Manch’s (SJM) national co-convener Ashwini Mahajan has said the Narendra Modi government shouldn’t trust Huawei — the Chinese telecom major that has been allowed to take part in 5G trials in India — as China has “jeopardised world health” with coronavirus, which is a result of its bio-warfare experiment.
Mahajan said there’s no guarantee that Huawei will not jeopardise India’s security.
“We are raising this point only to awake the Government of India about not trusting the Chinese. If they can jeopardise world health (with coronavirus) by allowing bio-warfare experiment, then what is the guarantee that Chinese telecom giant Huawei, which has a history of working with Chinese military, will not jeopardise India’s national security by stealing sensitive information?” he told ThePrint.
On coronavirus allegedly being the result of China’s bio-warfare experiment, Mahajan Wednesday shared a report on Twitter in which Israeli biological warfare analyst Dany Shoham was quoted as saying that the deadly new coronavirus could have originated in a laboratory in Wuhan linked to China’s covert biological weapons programme.
Mahajan quoted from the article and tweeted: “And we keep believing Chinese, taking them on face value. And even ready to handover our strategic sectors like telecom to Huawei.”
And we keep believing Chinese, taking them on face value. And even ready to handover our strategic sectors like telecom to Huawei. #SayNoToHuawei #BoycottChina #coronoavirus https://t.co/Ra9GmUF9FE
— ASHWANI MAHAJAN (@ashwani_mahajan) January 29, 2020

Experts have, however, debunked the idea that the virus could be man-made. 
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
“Based on the virus genome and properties there is no indication whatsoever that it was an engineered virus,” said Richard Ebright, a professor of chemical biology at Rutgers University, in a report published in The Washington Post.  
A Lancet study has suggested that while bats may be the original hosts of the new coronavirus, an animal sold at a seafood market in Wuhan could be spreading the virus to humans.
Also read: RSS affiliate Swadeshi Jagran Manch proposes more disruptive norms for e-commerce
Talking to ThePrint, Mahajan said despite urging the government to not allow Huawei in 5G trials, the Modi dispensation didn’t pay heed.
“We can’t compare the UK’s (5G) trials with India’s. We share boundaries with China, which has captured our land. Imagine if Huawei leaks our military, warfare data to Chinese military, then how will we fight this hazard?” 
In a letter to PM Modi in December, the SJM had said Huawei has been “banned in several countries” as more and more nations realised the full implications of having Huawei and Chinese companies in their communication networks.
Mahajan echoed the same while talking to ThePrint.
“Many countries suspect that the Chinese telecom major will indulge in stealing massive military and technological secrets through cyber-hacking. Despite our representation (to the government), the government has still allowed Huawei to participate in 5G trials,” he said.
The trials are likely to start between February-March.
On Thursday, Mahajan shared a report of The Guardian in which US Senator Tom Cotton said the UK government’s decision to allow Huawei partially in its 5G networks is like “allowing the KGB to build the UK’s telephone network during the cold war”.
Huawei decision 'like allowing KGB to build UK phone network' in cold war, says US senator – live news https://t.co/42ULOSIXkE
— ASHWANI MAHAJAN (@ashwani_mahajan) January 30, 2020

“There is concern and debate in the US and other countries over the risk of allowing Huawei to build 5G networks. (Then) Why are we inclined to allow such a high-risk vendor? Our corporates have the capability to build 5G networks. Why are we not giving them to operate the new technology,” Mahajan told ThePrint.
Also read: Swadeshi Jagran Manch to oppose Modi govt’s plan to sell foreign sovereign bonds
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
News media is in a crisis & only you can fix it
