CBSE Class 10 and 12 board exams will be held in 29 subjects
New Delhi: The Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) has announced they will hold Class 10 and Class 12 board exams for 29 subjects after the exams were postponed because of the Covid-19 lockdown.
The CBSE date sheets show that exams in at least 50 subjects are pending. A source in CBSE, however, was not able to confirm the exact number of subjects in which examinations are left.
The board Wednesday said that exams will be conducted only for the main subjects that will be required for promotion and that are crucial for admissions to higher education  institutions. For the rest of the subjects, the CBSE will not hold examinations. A separate evaluation scheme for those subjects will be sent to schools later on. 
The list of the 29 subjects for which exams will be held has been uploaded by the board on its official website. 
For Class 12, the subjects include business studies, geography, information sciences, among others. 
For Class 10, there will be no exams across the country, except for riot-hit Northeast Delhi.
A separate list of subjects of Class 10 has been given for exams to be held in Northeast Delhi, and not for the rest of the country. The subjects are Hindi and English, among others.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
Also read: Promote all students of class 1 to 8, HRD ministry tells CBSE
In a circular sent to all schools Wednesday, the board said they will inform well in advance before scheduling the new dates for the exams.
“It is informed that any decision that the board will take with regard to the conduct of examinations will be taken by undertaking extensive consultation with higher education authorities and by keeping all aspects related to entrance exams, admission dates, etc. in mind,” the circular stated. 
“In this context, it is further informed that the board will give notice of about 10 days to all stakeholders before starting the board examinations,” it added. 
While the board did not communicate any date for the exams, Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource Development, Amit Khare, had earlier told ThePrint the government might conduct exams in the first week of May if the lockdown is not extended beyond 14 April.
Also read: All Delhi students from nursery to class 8 to be promoted, says Manish Sisodia
 
Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram 
