2 Karnataka officials suspended, 5 men held after 1,000 attend chariot event in ‘hotspot’
Bengaluru: B.S. Yediyurappa’s Karnataka government has faced an embarrassing 24 hours, thanks to two glaring incidents of violation of the Covid-19 lockdown guidelines.
Not only did former CM H.D. Kumaraswamy’s family go ahead with his son Nikhil’s wedding Thursday, an annual chariot procession was also taken out at the Siddhalingeswara Temple in Revoor village of Chittapur taluk in Kalaburagi district the same day, with close to 1,000 devotees attending the event.
Kalaburagi is the place where India’s first Covid-19 death took place; it was the first district in the country to be shut down, and remains a Covid-19 hotspot. It has so far registered three coronavirus-related deaths.
For the Revoor incident, two officials — an area sub-inspector of police and a district administration official — have been charged with dereliction of duty and suspended. Five local residents have also been arrested for violating lockdown rules.
Also read: Social distancing for guests, none at mandap — Kumaraswamy son wedding fails Covid-19 test
Every year, the chariot festival takes place on 16 April, just before sunset. This time, though, as the date was approaching, district officials warned the temple officials that they should refrain from any procession or festivities which would involve bringing people out of their homes and standing in groups, according to Kalaburagi’s Superintendent of Police Iada Martin Marbaniang.
“They gave us a written assurance, and the Deputy Commissioner held several meetings with local leaders to explain how sensitive the Covid-19 situation is, and how Kalaburagi could become even more vulnerable if the lockdown is violated. Yet, they went ahead with it. We will be dealing with the violators with a firm hand,” he said.
We are deeply grateful to our readers & viewers for their time, trust and subscriptions.
Quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. Your support will define our work and ThePrint’s future.
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The Indian Police Service officer said at around 6.30 am Thursday, a group of people gathered and brought a five-storey ornate chariot decked with flowers. Seeing this, another 100-150 people gathered and began pulling the chariot.
The district administration was caught unaware, but by the time the police could act, the crowds had dispersed.
Mobile phone footage and photographs clicked by residents have been used to identify the violators.
“We have evidence to show how a group of men kept inviting others to join and pull the chariot. We have identified some of them and have arrested them,” Marbaniang said.
Marbaniang said the entire village of Revoor is now a containment zone, and strict implementation of the lockdown is in place.
“We will also begin testing of the residents in the area, as Kalaburagi is a high-risk zone. Random testing will also be conducted,” the SP said.
However, Karnataka’s Additional Chief Secretary (Health) Jawaid Akhtar, said the government is yet to take a call on whether to deploy rapid testing kits, which have just been received from New Delhi, in Kalaburagi.
“Of the many protocols that have been decided, one is to conduct rapid antibody tests. A call will be taken on that,” he said during a media briefing through video conference.
Local political leaders, including Chittapur MLA Priyank Kharge, said people are yet to understand the seriousness of the situation.
Also read: Karnataka bracing for spurt in Covid-19 cases by April end, a long fight ahead: Yediyurappa
 
