Indian Express Covid-19 Tracker: India’s state-wise and global cases, deaths and recoveries
Indian Express COVID-19 Tracker: The death toll due to Covid-19 rose to 5,164 in India on Sunday, according to the Union Health Ministry. The number of active Covid-19 cases stood at 89,995 while 86,983 people were cured and discharged, and one patient has migrated, the ministry said. The total number of cases include 111 nationals.
The first coronavirus case in India was reported on January 30, 2020. To combat the spread of the virus, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, on March 24 imposed a nationwide lockdown — world’s largest — for three weeks, which was subsequently extended till May 3 and later till May 17. Provisions of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 has been invoked across the states.
Maharashtra is the worst-affected state, followed by Tamil Nadu, Delhi and Gujarat.
(The list was last updated on May 31 at 3.00 pm. All details have been sourced from Ministry of Home Affairs)
As the number of confirmed coronavirus cases reached 6,075,786 and the global death toll surpassed 369,433 countries took cautious steps toward easing lockdowns imposed amid the pandemic, but fears of a surge in infections made even some outbreak-wounded businesses reluctant to reopen.
President Donald Trump had earlier said he’s hoping that the total number of COVID-19 deaths in the United States will be below 100,000. Even that, he acknowledged, is a “horrible number.” Trump’s predictions of the expected U.S. death toll have changed over time, and he repeatedly has used high estimates to make the case that his administration’s actions, especially his decision to restrict travel from China, have saved lives. His actions have been challenged by state, local and public health officials who have complained about shortages of testing supplies and safety gear for doctors and nurses.
(The list was last updated on May 31 at 3:15 pm. All details have been sourced from the John Hopkins University)
Don’t miss these articles on Coronavirus from the Explained section:
‣ How coronavirus attacks, step by step
‣ Mask or no mask? Why the guidance has been shifting
‣ Besides a face cover, should I wear gloves when I go outdoors?
‣ How the Agra, Bhilwara and Pathanamthitta Covid-19 containment models differ
‣ Can coronavirus damage your brain?

