Coronavirus: Second evacuation flight to Wuhan leaves from Delhi; toll rises to 259 in China
Of the 324 evacuees, 220 are in the Indian Army quarantine facility at Manesar and 104 are in ITBP facility at Chawla Camp. They were first screened at the Delhi IGI’s airport by a team of medical officials.
China has reported 259 people have died and nearly 11,800 are infected due to the new virus. The US has declared a public health emergency and taken drastic steps to significantly restrict entry into the country.
The Indian Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel (@indianexpress) and stay updated with the latest headlines

"The cyber cell arrested three people for spreading misinformation on social media about #CoronaVirus. Case will also be filed against those who forwarded these messages. The arrested persons hail from Thrissur," said state health minister KK Shylaja. "The patient with #coronavirus is stable. 69 people who were in contact with this patient have been identified. A total of 1793 people are currently under monitoring," she added.
Kerala Health Minister KK Shylaja: The cyber cell arrested three people for spreading misinformation on social media about #CoronaVirus. Case will also be filed against those who forwarded these messages. The arrested persons hail from Thrissur. (File pic) pic.twitter.com/T1eVIl3KxJ
Coronavirus outbreak: IndiGo says will suspend flights on Kolkata-Guangzhou route from February 6 to 25
Six Indians stranded at the coronavirus-hit Wuhan city were stopped from boarding the first special Air India flight to India due to high fever, officials said on Saturday. The first flight left early Saturday with 324 stranded Indians mostly students from Wuhan. Officials here told PTI that six Indians could not board the flight as they were stopped by the Chinese immigration officials after they tested for high temperature. The six students may have to undergo tests to determine whether they have symptoms of the coronavirus. (PTI)
At least 33 Sri Lankan students, who were evacuated on Saturday from the coronavirus-hit Wuhan, will remain under quarantine for two weeks, health officials said.
The students arrived on a special SriLankan Airlines flight which landed at the southern Mattala airport on Saturday morning and were taken to the central province military facility at Diyathalawa.
The flight departed for Wuhan on Friday to evacuate the students following discussions between the Sri Lankan and Chinese authorities. 
Only one positive coronavirus case has been reported from the country so far. (PTI)
Evacuated Indian citizens at ITBP) Chhawla Camp on Saturday.
#WATCH Delhi: The Indians who arrived at Delhi Airport today in Air India special flight from Wuhan (China) thank the team of doctors&other officials at Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) Chhawla Camp, after doctors interact&guide them for preventive measures against #Coronavirus pic.twitter.com/xsHht9Os2v
Indian Army Chief General Manoj Mukund Naravane said on Saturday that the whole nation will have to get together to make sure that the threat coronavirus is contained at the lowest level and that the Army is playing its part in the effort.
When asked about the quarantine facility set up by the Army near Manesar for the 324 Indians being evacuated from China in the wake of novel coronavirus outbreak, Gen Naravane said, "Coronavirus epidemic has achieved global proportions. We are all seized of this major threat which is there for the entire world. To that end whole of the nation has to get together and put in whatever measures required to make sure that this threat and epidemic is contained at the lowest level. And for that we are playing our part."
deleting_message
In a statement, the UK government said, "As of 31 January, some staff and dependants from the British Embassy and Consulates are being withdrawn from China. Essential staff needed to continue critical work will remain. In the event that the situation deteriorates further, the ability of the British Embassy and Consulates to provide assistance to British nationals from within China may be limited." (Reuters)
Air New Zealand said on Saturday they were suspending direct flights from their countries to mainland China in response to travel restrictions imposed in the wake of the coronavirus crisis.
Air New Zealand said its Auckland to Shanghai service would be paused during the same time as the Qantas flights. (Reuters)
People suffering from conjunctivitis, respiratory disorders and those who have travelled abroad, China in particular, or are in touch with the people likewise, could represent cases of 2019-nCoV, an ophthalmologist in Maharashtra said.
In a statement, Dr Vardhaman Kankariya, Secretary of the Maharashtra Ophthalmological Society, has sent an alert to eye specialists in the state about newly published literature in The lancet. 'This specific information about coronavirus has been shared by our parent body American Academy of Ophthalmology,' Dr Kankariya said.
He added that the academy and federal officials recommend protection for the mouth, nose and eyes when caring for patients potentially infected with 2019-nCoV.
Air India statement: Another flight will depart to Wuhan from Delhi at 12.50 pm today with different set of crew, same doctors team with other aircraft. The rescue team is again head by Capt Amitabh Singh, Director Operation, Air India.The second evacuation flight by Air India to Wuhan will depart today at 12.50pm with different set of crew but same doctors. The rescue team is again being led by Capt Amitabh Singh, Director Operations, Air India. @IndianExpress— Pranav Mukul (@pranavmukul) February 1, 2020
Qantas Airways said it will suspend its two direct flight routes from Australia to mainland China from February 9 in response to travel restrictions imposed by some countries due to the coronavirus crisis.
The Australian national carrier's direct flights from Sydney to Beijing and Sydney to Shanghai will be halted until March 29, it said in a statement published Saturday. (Reuters)
Of the 324 Indians flown from Wuhan to Delhi by Air India, three are minors, 211 students and 110 are working professionals.
Of the 324 Indians flown from Wuhan to Delhi by Air India, three are minors, 211 students and 110 are working professionals. @IndianExpress
Indians who arrived in the Air India special flight from Wuhan at Delhi Airport today are being taken to the Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) Chhawla Camp.
Delhi: Indians who arrived in the Air India special flight from Wuhan (China) at Delhi Airport today, are being taken to the Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) Chhawla Camp. They will be kept in isolation for 14 days at the camp for medical observation. #CoronaVirus pic.twitter.com/U6D1Xa1WE8
Facebook says it's working to limit the spread of misinformation and potentially harmful content about the coronavirus as bogus claims about the ongoing outbreak circulate online.
Kang-Xing Jin, Facebook's head of health, announced that the social media platform will begin removing posts that include false claims or conspiracy theories about the virus that have been flagged by health authorities. The company said it will focus on posts that discourage people from getting medical treatment, or that make potentially dangerous claims about cures.
The company will also limit the spread of posts debunked by its third-party fact checkers, and send users who shared the post a notification.
(AP)
Screening will be conducted by a team of doctors at Delhi Airport for all the 324 Indians who have arrived in the Air India special flight from Wuhan today. If necessary, the evacuees will be kept in isolation at facilities of the Army in Manesar and the Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) near Chhawla.
Delhi: #CoronaVirus screening will be conducted by a team of doctors at Delhi Airport for all the 324 Indians who have arrived in the Air India special flight from Wuhan (China). Later on, if necessary, they will be put under medical observation. https://t.co/nhLnq2GIz8 pic.twitter.com/NgGep1mM6q
Air India’s special jumbo B747 that plane took off from the Wuhan airport in the early hours of Saturday evacuating 324 Indian nationals landed in New Delhi, ANI reported. The national carrier will operate another flight to evacuate remaining Indians stuck in China as the neighbouring country continue to deal with the outbreak of novel coronavirus.
After the US, Japan and Germany also advised against non-essential travel and Britain did as well, except for Hong Kong and Macao. Popular holiday and shopping destination Singapore barred Chinese from travelling there, becoming the first Southeast Asian nation to do so.
The death toll from China's new coronavirus outbreak has risen to 259 and the tally of confirmed infections has surged to nearly 12,000, news agency AFP reported Saturday. The number of infections in China also rose, by 2,102, bringing the nationwide total to 11,791. 
A new viral disease that has infected nearly 10,000 people across the world has just been declared by the World Health Organization (WHO) as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. This new strain of coronavirus, which has caused the infection, had by Friday claimed 213 lives in China, where it originated last month. In India, one person, who recently returned from China, has tested positive for the virus, and has been quarantined. Click here to know more.

 Coronavirus outbreak LIVE Updates: People screened in China. (File Photo)
Meanwhile, Border-guarding force ITBP has also prepared a 600-bedded facility in Delhi to quarantine and provide basic medical care to those suspected to have been affected by the new coronavirus. The facility is operational in an Indo-Tibetan Border Police camp in south-West Delhi’s Chhawla area that houses ITBP sector headquarters.
