Coronavirus India updates, April 24: Tamil Nadu declares complete lockdown in 5 cities; 9 RPF men test positive in Bengal
Coronavirus India Latest Updates: With 1,752 fresh cases being reported in last 24 hours —a highest single-day tally, the coronavirus tally across the country rose to 23,452 on Friday while the death toll stood at 723, the Union Health Minister announced. As many as 17,915 Covid-19 cases are active while at least 4,813 people have been cured and discharged so far. One patient has migrated, the ministry added. The Health Ministry said 77 foreign nationals are among the total 23,452 Covid-19 cases reported in the country.
Niti Aayog member Dr V K Paul said going by the projections, cases in India would have crossed 1 lakh by now, but the lockdown has restricted that to around 23,000. “Effects will show till the first or second week of May,” he added.
Of the 718 deaths, Maharashtra topped the tally with 283 fatalities, followed by Gujarat at 112, Madhya Pradesh at 83, Delhi at 50, Rajasthan and Andhra Pradesh at 27 each. The death toll reached 24 each in Uttar Pradesh and Telengana, 20 in Tamil Nadu and 17 in Karnataka.
Here is a look at some of the top Covid-19 developments in India:
Expressing concern over the COVID-19 situation in certain quarters, Ministry of Home Affairs Friday said the matter is especially serious in major hotspot districts or emerging hotspots such as Ahmedabad and Surat (Gujarat), Thane (Maharashtra), Hyderabad (Telangana), and Chennai (Tamil Nadu).  After taking stock of the situation in West Bengal, Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh, ministry of Home Affairs have hence formed five more teams to inspect the hotspots in the states of Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and Telangana. One more district, Thane in Maharashtra, has been put under observation.
Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami Friday announced total lockdown in five cities from Sunday. Chennai, Madurai, and Coimbatore corporations will be under complete shutdown from 6 am on April 26, Sunday, till 9 pm on April 29, Thursday. Salem and Tiruppur corporations will follow complete lockdown from 6 am on April 26, Sunday, to 9pm on April 28, Wednesday.
At least nine Railway Protection Force (RPF) personnel, who had recently visited Delhi for some urgent official work, tested positive for the virus, an official from the South Eastern Railway (SER) said on Friday.
According to the official, the personnel were part of a 28-member RPF contingent from the Kharagpur division of SER, which had returned on April 14 from the national capital with a consignment of arms and ammunition aboard a parcel express train.
The swab of one of the constables were sent for medical examination after he developed coronavirus-like symptoms. The constable was admitted to a designated private hospital at Uluberia after his reports confirmed that he was infected, SER spokesman Sanjay Ghosh said. The reports of eight others also came positive, he added.
While a few of the personnel tested negative, the reports of the remaining RPF men are awaited.
Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Friday said the initial results of plasma therapy trial conducted on four coronavirus patients is encouraging and raises hopes to save several lives from the dreaded disease.
Speaking to reporters via video conferencing, Kejriwal said the government will conduct more clinical trials of plasma therapy in the next two-three days. Thereafter, the government will seek the Centre’s nod to use the therapy on all serious Covid-19 patients across the city, he added.
The Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) supremo also appealed to those who have recovered from the disease to come forward and donate plasma for the remaining patients.
As many as 13 madrassa students, who had come in contact with Tablighi Jamaat members suffering from coronavirus, tested positive for the virus in Kanpur, a senior health official said. Kanpur has reported 107 cases of the virus so far.
Of the 50 samples which were sent for testing, 13 of them proved to be positive, Chief Medical Officer Dr Ashok Shukla said.
The students belong to a madrassa in Coolie Bazaar, a hotspot zone, from where about 30 people had earlier tested positive. The contact-tracing of all the patients testing positive are underway.
Three men were arrested for allegedly attacking a policeman, who was on lockdown duty, at Ambejogai town of Maharashtra’s Beed district, an official said.
Govind Yelmate, who is attached to Amjogai police station, was probing an offence at Yashwantnagar when he spotted Kishor Lomte, Vaibhav Akhate and Tushar Shingare chatting at the street corner and questioned them.
However, the trio got angry and attacked Yelmate, the official said, adding that the accused were arrested under sections 353 (assault to deter a public servant from discharge of his duty) and other relevant provisions of the Indian Penal Code.
Incidentally, the injured policeman had provided two-month ration to a disabled man in town a couple of days ago, the official said.
The funeral of a 75-year-old woman, who died of Covid-19, was held amid strong opposition from locals in Dakshina Kannada district in Karnataka, police said on Friday.
The final rites of the woman from Kasba village were held at the Hindu Rudrabhoomi at Kaikunje near Bantwal town, about 30 kms from Bengaluru, on Thursday night under strict police vigilance, even as local people who feared risk to their health protested, they said.
The Maharashtra government has amended its revised lockdown guidelines to allow carrying out of pre-monsoon-related works in Mumbai, Pune and Pimpri-Chinchwad, areas that have badly hit by the coronavirus outbreak.
In its revised guidelines issued on April 21 regarding relaxation of lockdown rules, the government had withdrawn all concessions to Mumbai and Pune regions, which account for a bulk of the more than 6,000 coronavirus cases in the state.
However, in an order issued on Thursday, the government said all pre-monsoon related works, including metro rail and any work permitted by the municipal commissioners of these three cities, will be resumed.
