Coronavirus India, April 18 Highlights: Delhi reports 186 cases in last 24 hours; total cases near 15,000-mark
Coronavirus India News Updates: Gujarat continued to witness a surge in number of cases as it reported 173 new cases while Tamil Nadu recorded 82 more recoveries on Saturday. Maharashtra remains the worst affected state with over 3600 cases. Nationally, the total number of cases neared the 15,000-mark with 488 deaths.
Addressing a daily media briefing, Health Ministry Joint Secretary Lav Agarwal said of the 14,378 coronavirus infections reported in the country so far, 4,291 cases in 23 states and Union Territories are linked to the Markaz event held in Delhi’s Nizamuddin area in March. Follow Indian Express Covid-19 tracker for latest updates
Prime Minister Narendra Modi Saturday said “humanity will surely overcome the coronavirus pandemic,” as he hailed the efforts put in by various ministries to help people during the lockdown, and in the fight against COVID-19. Meanwhile, the Delhi government has kicked off community testing in high-risk areas to ensure there is no community spread. (Click to follow our coverage of Covid-19)

Gujarat total COVID-19 cases rise to 1,421, a jump of nearly 1,000 cases in the last seven days.
#Gujarat total of #COVIDー19 cases: 1,421 - a jump of nearly 1,000 cases in 7 daysIn other news:- Plasma therapy to start Sun onwardsICMR nod in record 2 days, plasma extraction done, tests to be run overnight- 1st #Ahmedabad patient discharged after 32 days@IndianExpress
A 46-year-old man from Sahkar Society on Kothariya Road becomes sixth person from Rajkot to test positive for the novel coronavirus on Saturday. Sahkar Society is on the western side of Kothariya Road while Jungleshwar, an active cluster of the coronavirus infection, is on the east.
46-yr-old man from Sahkar Society on Kothariya Road becomes 6th person from Rajkot to test positive for #NovelCoronavirus from Rajkot Saturday. Sahkar Society is on western side of Kothariya Road while Jungleshwar, an active cluster of coronavirus infection on east @IndianExpress
Delhi has reported 186 fresh cases in the last 24 hours, taking the total number of cases to 1,893. 43 people have died so far
🏥Delhi Health Bulletin and Testing Status - 18th April 2020 🏥#DelhiFightsCorona pic.twitter.com/snoVZIQcWS
The Centre clarifies that there is no decision as yet on the resumption of domestic or passenger flights.
Union Government statement: "The Central Government clarifies that there is no decision as yet on resumption of domestic or passenger flights." @IndianExpress
Gujarat has reported 280 coronavirus cases in a day, recording the hughest single-day spike so far, the state health department said. With this latest update, the infected poeple in the state has shot up to 1,376 while death toll rose by 12 to 53. "Most of these cases have been reported from hotspot areas in Ahmedabad, mainly due to concentrated testing," said Principal Secretary (Health) Jayanti Ravi. 
The Red Fort in Old Delhi has been lit with lamps and candles to observe the World Heritage Day on Saturday. The lights read: 'Hum jeetengay' (We shall overcome this), in the backdrop of the coronavirus pandemic that the country is grappling to tackle. 


The British monarch Queen Elizabeth, who turns 94 on Tuesday, has decided not to publicly mark the occasion in any special way including the artillery salute she traditionally gets on her birthday. 
* Canada: US and Cananda decide to keep border closed for another 30 days.
* Stockholm: Sweden has reported 111 new COVID19 deaths with total deaths at 1,511. Swedish health officials say 13,822 people have confirmed infections Most of the infections and deaths have been recorded in Stockholm which has 897 fatalities.
* Africa: Africas coronavirus cases have surpassed 20000 according to the Africa Centers for Disease Control and Prevention The number of deaths across the continent surpassed 1000 on Saturday. Fiftytwo of Africas 54 countries have confirmed cases of the virus and the World Health Organization has expressed concern that local spread is increasing.
* UK: British authorities reported 888 more coronavirusrelated hospital deaths on Saturday bringing the total to 15,464. The latest daily figure from the health department is 41 higher than the previous days 847 deaths. Britain posted a record high daily death toll of 980 a week ago.
* France: The French military is dismantling a field hospital set up to relieve the pressure on overwhelmed medical centers The dismantling of the makeshift hospital in the eastern city of Mulhouse began Friday as the virus has receded in the region a military official. The field hospital held 30 beds and treated dozens of patients that couldnt fit in Mulhouse hospitals Hospitals in nearby Germany Switzerland and Luxembourg also took in French patients from the area
Ludhiana city police’s assistant commissioner of Police (ACP, North) Anil Kohli, who was diagnosed with the novel coronavirus on April 13, died at SPS Hospital Saturday. With his death, the toll in Punjab has gone up to 16. Kohli was a frontline officer, working 9-10 hours at the city’s busiest wholesale vegetable market, since curfew was imposed in Punjab to contain the spread of the virus. He was admitted in hospital on April 8. It is suspected that he got infected at the sabzi mandi.
#Punjab: Ludhiana ACP Anil Kohli who died of #coronavirus today, being given full state honors before cremation. Social distancing being maintained. Led by DM Pradeep Agrawal and CP Rakesh Agrawal @Ludhiana_Police @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/DqbIJ79JSA
In a major outbreak of the virus in the armed forces, about 26 Indian Navy personnel have tested positive for coronavirus at the strategically-located Western Naval Command in Mumbai. The infected sailors were staying at a bachelors' residential block at the INS Angre, a shore-based logistics and support establishment, just a few hundred metres away from the main Naval dockyard housing a range of frontline warships and submarines of the force.
'The 26 sailors who were placed in isolation after testing positive for COVID-19 at Mumbai, belong to INS Angre, a shore establishment. There has so far not been a single case of COVID-19 onboard any ship, submarine or air station of the Indian Navy,' the Indian Navy said in a statement.
More than 50 helplines have been started across India to provide succour to women facing domestic violence during the ongoing lockdown. The domestic abuse national helpline number is 181 while women police helpline numbers are 1091 and 1291. There are two numbers to provide help to the women through psychologists -- 9000070839 and 0402760531.
@NCWIndia have launched a 'WHATSAPP NUMBER' for help & assistance to women experiencing #DomesticViolence at wake of #Covid19Lockdown. Send 🆘WHATSAPP ALERT🚨📳 7⃣2⃣1⃣7⃣7⃣3⃣5⃣3⃣7⃣2⃣#HelplineSupport#IndiaFightsGenderAbuse#SayNOtoDomesticViolence pic.twitter.com/qhQmJTisZm
Indian sportpersons have joined hands to fight the coronavirus pandemic, changing their popular hashtag #TeamIndia to #TeamMaskForce. PM Narendra Modi lauded the move and said, "Among the most important tasks today- be a part of #TeamMaskForce. Small but essential precautions can keep us all safe. Important to spread awareness about it."
#TeamIndia is now #TeamMaskForce!Join #IndiaFightsCorona and download @mygovindia's @SetuAarogya mobile application 📱@PMOIndia @narendramodi 🇮🇳 pic.twitter.com/M06okJhegt
A 21-month-old boy has tested positive for COVID-19 in Kolkata. None of his family members exhibited any coronavirus-like symptom, a health official said. All 14 other members of his family, including four children and two elderly persons, will be sent to a quarantine centre in Rajarhat as they had shared a three-bedroom flat with the infant, the official added.
The infant, a resident of Uttar Panchanna Gram in south Kolkata, was shifted to the Beliaghata ID and BG Hospital from the Institute of Child Health (ICH) after he tested positive for COVID-19 on Friday night.
"The child was admitted to the ICH on April 16 with a severe cough. He is stable now but we have kept him under observation at the special isolation ward of the Beliaghata ID and BG Hospital," the official said. (PTI)
Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal said there had been a slight decrease in the number of COVID-19 cases in Delhi in the last three days and hoped that it would reduce further in the coming days. He said out of 2,274 samples tested, only 67 people tested positive for the novel virus on Friday, whie addressing an online media briefing on the virus.
"Some people have been seen on streets in containment areas. Yesterday, 26 members of one family tested positive for coronavirus in an area in Jahangir Puri which has been declared as containment area," Kejriwal said. He also said that 71 containment areas have so far been identified in the national capital.
After a pizza delivery employee tested positive for COVID-19 in Delhi, food delivery apps Zomato and Swiggy delivery employees stand outside food mart in Uttar Prdes's Lucknow awaiting orders. According to them, after the Delhi incident, they are not getting orders. The man had cough and fatigue but no fever since March 20, but since he had no history of international travel or known contact with a patient, he continued to deliver food, officials had said. Following the incident, 72 houses in South Delhi were quarantined. Seventeen coworkers have also been put under quarantine.


Twentyfive new cases have surfaced in Karntaka in last 24 hours taking the total count in the state to 384 including 14 deaths and 104 discharges.


The Maharashtra government said door-to-door delivery of newspapers and magazines was prohibited as part of measures to contain the spread of COVID-19 in the state. Although the print media has been exempted from the lockdown from April 20 onwards, door-to-door delivery of newspapers and magazines will be prohibited, given the extent of the spread, the government stated. (PTI)
Air India has announced it opened bookings on select domestic and international routes from May 4 and June 1, respectively."In the light of the ongoing global health concerns, we have currently stopped accepting bookings on all domestic flights for travel till May 3, 2020, and on all international flights for travel till May 31, 2020," a notification on Air India's website said on Saturday.
"Bookings for select domestic flights for travel from May 4, 2020, and for international flights for travel from June 1, 2020 onwards are open," it stated.
When asked about the Remdesivir, an experimaental antiviral drug, the ICMR said studies published on the drug so far do not suggest it be used for trial but Gilead Science is conducting a 5,500-patient trial to compare giving it for 5 days vs 10 days. "Even the interim analysis data for that is not out," R R Gangakhedkar said. He also said, in case the remdesivir is found to be effective, the ICMR could either conduct patent pooling as it is a pandemic or if a local company produces it. "However, India is part of the Solidarity Trial that will look at the medicine," he said.
Lauding Kerala's Kasaragod 'effective' coronavirus containment plan, the Health Ministry said the city used drones for surveillance, used GPS for tracking people on home quarantine, did aggressive testing. 'There was 100% house to house survey in Kasargod, a very effective campaign called 'Break The Chain',' Aggarwal said.
Meanwhile, the ICMR clarified they are not conducting a trial with the hydroxychroloquine drug. 'It is an observational study with 480 patients. Some people had hypoglycaemia after taking the hydroxychroloquine; 22% of the people had diabetes, blood pressure, respiratory illnesses. that's why they took the medicine. 14% did not even do ECG before having,' R R Gangakhedkar said.
The Health Minsitry said in last 28 days, Karnataka's Kodagu saw no postitive cases and 22 districts in 12 states have not had a single coronavirus case in 14 days, which includes, Lakhisarai, Gopalganj, Bhagalpur in Bihar, Dholpur & Udaipur in Rajasthan and Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir.
Joint Secretary, Health Ministry, Lav Aggarwal said 14.4 per cent deaths have occured in the age group from 0-45, 10.3 per cent in 45-60 and 60-75 per cent deaths have occured with people above 75 years. Around 83 per cent of the deceased had co-morbid issues.
 Coronavirus LIVE updates: People are seen at a temporary quarantine centre in Kolkata on Friday, during the central government imposed lockdown to control the spread of coronavirus. (Express Photo by Partha Paul)
Coronavirus COVID-19 Tracker India LIVE Updates: Reaching out to students during lockdown, Doordarshan and All India Radio are broadcasting virtual classes and other educational content through their regional channels across the country on TV, radio and YouTube.
As all schools across the country are closed, these virtual classes are helping lakhs of students, especially those in Class 10 and 12, in preparation for their board and competitive examinations, according to an official statement. The virtual learning through DD and AIR include curriculum-based classes for primary, middle and high-school level students.
 A Pre-primary school child taking her classes online during the lockdown in North Kashmir's Bandipora. (Express photo by Shuaib Masoodi)
Man from Pune who slipped in despite check-posts is first Covid-19 patient in ‘Green Zone’ Parbhani
A 21-year-old man from Pune, who surreptitiously travelled 370 km on his two-wheeler, sneaking in through three ‘sealed’ district borders to reach Parbhani earlier this week, became the first Covid-19 positive patient in the district which so far had managed to remain in ‘Green Zone’ with no reported case so far.
 Fire brigade personnel disinfect an ambulance in Pune (Expess photo by Arul Horizon)
The man, who hails from Jawala Bazaar in Hingoli District and works at a furniture store in Bhosari near Pune, left his residence in Bhosari on April 12 night and reached his brother-in-law’s home in Parbhani next morning. As he was complaining of throat irritation, he was taken to a public health centre by the relative where a throat swab was taken and sent to a lab. The result came positive on Thursday.
Doubling rate of coronavirus cases less than national average in these states, UTs
The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) said three strains of the virus have been detected in India so far. While this will have no bearing on the efficacy of a drug, as and when it is developed, it may affect the efficacy of a vaccine, said Dr R R Gangakhedkar, head of epidemiology and infectious diseases, ICMR.
 Women from Zamrudpur receive food at an MCD school in Delhi (Express Photo by Tashi Tobgyal)
“Before the lockdown, the doubling rate was three days. Going by the number of cases in the last seven days, the doubling rate has been 6.2 days. In 19 states and Union Territories, the doubling rate is less than the national average,” Lav Agarwal, Joint Secretary, Health Ministry, said at the daily briefing.
These states and UTs are: Kerala, Uttarakhand, Haryana, Ladakh, Himachal Pradesh, Bihar, Odisha, Puducherry, Chandigarh, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Delhi, Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab, Assam, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and Karnataka.
Agarwal said the average growth factor of cases between March 15 and 31 was 2.1, while it was 1.2 between April 1 and 15. “There has been a 40% decline in growth and it has come with an increase in testing of samples. We are doing better than most countries,” he said.
Here’s how Maharashtra is dealing with the Covid-19 outbreak
With over 3,000 coronavirus cases and 194 deaths, Maharashtra continues to be the worst-affected state in the country. This, as it faces the crisis of thousands of anxious migrant labourers wanting to go home, and slum clusters where social distancing remains an idea far-fetched from reality.
 Maharashtra is the worst-affected state with over 3,000 confirmed cases of novel coronavirus (Express photo/Pradip Das)
The state, with a population of over 11 crore (according to the 2011 census), currently has over 3,205 positive cases of novel coronavirus, including 300 recoveries and 194 deaths. The metropolitan city of Mumbai is a hotspot, having recorded 117 deaths so far, and a newly sworn-in Shiv Sena-Congress-NCP government is on its toes with all economic activity brought to a halt for at least 40 days.
Explained: Guidelines for non-immigrant visa holders in the US amid COVID-19
Government offices to reopen with senior staff from April 20
In Mumbai, migrants lose hope, money: For how long, they ask
Govt wants to use PMJAY for free coronavirus testing in private labs, but 2 cr families missing from database
Don’t miss these articles on Coronavirus from the Explained section:
-How coronavirus attacks, step by step
-Mask or no mask? Why the guidance has been shifting
-Besides a face cover, should I wear gloves when I go outdoors?
