Coronavirus July 24 Updates: Nagaland announces 7-day total lockdown in Kohima
The Nagaland government on Friday announced seven-day “total lockdown” in its capital city Kohima to break the chain of Covid-19 spread in the city. The Deputy Commissioner (DC), Kohima, Gregory Thejawelie  promulgated the order in Kohima Municipal Area under Kohima Sadar Jurisdiction with effect from July 25 to July 31. Before this, Tamil Nadu too had announced that Coimbatore would undergo two-day complete lockdown starting Saturday. In a bid to curb the rise of Covid-19 cases, district collector K Rajamani Friday announced the shutdown from Saturday 5 pm till Monday 6 am.
Coronavirus India Live Updates
No flight will operate to and from the Kolkata airport on July 25 and 29, amid the total lockdown in place across the state on both the days, officials said Friday. “As of now, it has been decided that there will be no flight operations on July 25 and 29,” news agency PTI quoted an official at the Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose International (NSCBI) Airport as saying. The West Bengal government has decided to impose complete lockdown two days a week in the state to break the chain of Covid transmission.
AIIMS Delhi on Friday administered first dose of Bharat Biotech’s Covaxin to a 30-year-old male. The subject will be monitored for two weeks after which he will be given the second dose.The Covid-19 tally in India rose to 12,87,945 on Friday after 49,311 fresh cases were reported within a span of 24 hours. Covaxin is India’s Covid-19 vaccine candidate developed by Bharat Biotech India (BBIL) in collaboration with the National Institute of Virology (NIV).
Globally, 15,445,043 people have been infected with the virus so far. While 8,763,516 people have recovered, as many as 632,173 fatalities have been registered till now. The United States continued to remain the worst-affected followed by Brazil and India.

With second-highest single- day spike of 1,068 new cases, the tally of coronavirus cases in Gujarat rose to 53,631 on Friday, said a release by the state health department. Surat saw a spike of 309 cases, as well as 12 deaths. Overall, twenty-six coronavirus patients died, taking the death toll due to the pandemic in the state to 2,283, the release said. With 1,068 new cases, Gujarat was in the 10th spot in the country in terms of daily spike, it said. There are 12,518 active patients in the state now including 83 who are on ventilator, it said. On average, Gujarat is conducting around 15,000 tests every day which translates into per million 224.53 tests, it said. (PTI)
The COVID-19 case count in Mumbai mounted to 1,06,891 after 1,062 people tested positive for the infection on Friday, the civic body said. The death toll rose to 5,981 after 54 patients succumbed to the infection, it said. The Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) said that the number of recovered persons in the city increased to 78,260 after 1,158 patients were discharged from hospitals in the last 24 hours. The recovery rate of COVID-19 patients in the city has gone up to 73 per cent. According to the BMC, the city currently has 22,647 active patients and 1,051 suspected ones have been admitted to hospitals. (PTI)
The Uttarakhand Devasthanam Board on Friday issued a revised standard operating procedure (SOP) allowing asymptomatic persons from outside the state to undertake the chardham yatra but with conditions. According to the revised SOP, asymptomatic people from outside the state who have undergone the RT-PCR test from an ICMR-authorised lab and tested negative 72 hours prior to their arrival in Uttarakhand can undertake a pilgrimage to the shrines after procuring an e-pass from the Devasthanam Board, its CEO, Ravinath Raman, told reporters. The revised SOP has been issued to give an impetus to the chardham yatra, which commenced on July 1 but was limited to people from Uttarakhand only, he said. (PTI)
The Aviation Ministry on Friday announced that the cap on airfares for domestic travel will remain in place till November 24 or until further orders. The ministry had announced the capping of the fares citing a possible surge in airfares due to pent-up demand when it decided to open up the domestic flight services in calibrated manner from May 25 after a hiatus of two months owing to the coronavirus-induced lockdown.
During a press conference in May, Union Minister for Civil Aviation Hardeep Singh Puri has said that in the case of Delhi, Mumbai, the minimum fare would be Rs 3,500 for a journey between 90-120 minutes, maximum fare would be Rs 10,000. This would be operative for 3 months – till one minute to midnight on August 24. Now, the ministry has extended this for another three months.
With an all-party meeting against another state-wide shutdown, the Kerala government Friday decided to not go in for a complete lockdown as of now, Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan said. Vijayan, addressed the media after the meeting to decide on whether or not to re-impose lockdown, said the representatives of various political parties were against a complete shutdown. "There were two opinions on a lockdown. Some experts op complete shut down, while others wanted the existing restrictions to be strengthened. I put forward the same at the all-party-meeting and the representatives were not in favour of the complete lockdown.They said that the current restrictions should be strengthened," PTI quoted Vijayan as saying.

The Nagaland government on Friday announced seven-day “total lockdown” in its capital city Kohima to break the chain of Covid-19 spread in the city. The Deputy Commissioner (DC), Kohima, Gregory Thejawelie promulgated the order in Kohima Municipal Area under Kohima Sadar Jurisdiction with effect from July 25 to July 31.
Domestic airfare cap to remain in place till November 24 or until further orders, said Aviation Ministry on Friday.
Over 90 trainees at a Police Training School here have tested positive for COVID-19, official sources said on Friday. After a constable tested Positive some days ago, a random test was conducted at the training school near Thanisandra here, during which over 90 of them have tested positive on Thursday, officials said. Around 400 constables who recently joined the state police force are undergoing training at the schools. (PTI)
The AAP on Friday said the BJP-ruled municipal corporations have not disbursed salaries of healthcare workers, alleging corruption within the civic bodies. However, North Delhi Mayor Jai Prakash called it as a "baseless allegation" to divert attention from the real issue. Doctors of the North Delhi Municipal Corporation's two major hospitals -- Hindu Rao Hospital and Kasturba Hospital -- have been demanding release of salaries due to them. The AAP said the Delhi government has already disbursed the required amount to the civic bodies. (PTI)
Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan on Friday said that at 864 cases and less than 21 deaths per million population, India has one of the world's lowest Covid-19 infection and death rate. He underlined that the recovery rate among patients in the country is 63.45 per cent and the mortality is 2.3 per cent. These remarks were made by Vardhan at the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) Health Ministers' Digital Meet held digitally, the health ministry said. "There is currently no institutional mechanism within SCO to discuss cooperation in traditional medicine that has the potential to fulfil the WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2014-2023 and also reinforce the effective implementation of the joint statement on cooperation in combating epidemics signed at the Qingdao Summit in 2018," PTI quoted him as saying.
Coimbatore has become the latest district to undergo lockdown in Tamil Nadu. In a bid to curb the rise of Covid-19 cases, district collector K Rajamani announced Friday that there will be a complete lockdown in the district from Saturday (July 25) 5 pm till Monday (July 27) 6 am. The announcement comes after the district saw a surge in the number of Covid-19 cases in the past few days. In the statement, the collector said strict action will be initiated against persons who are found wandering around unnecessarily in the lockdown period.
“In this lockdown period only essential services like Health care, milk distribution, electricity will be allowed. Uzhavar sandhai (Farmer’s market), markets, trade or other firms, grocery stores, Fish stall, flower market, meat shops, Tasmac liquor outlets will remain closed,” the statement read.
Police officers, Health and Family Welfare department, Revenue and Disaster Management department, local municipal staff members involved in the Covid-19 prevention activities will be allowed to function as usual.
Till date, Coimbatore has recorded 2,966 cases including 32 deaths. A total of 1,659 have been discharged following treatment and there are still 1,275 active cases in the district.
Collector Rajamani himself had tested positive for Covid-19. He was admitted to Kovai Medical centre and hospital on July 15 following complaints of mild sore throat and fever. He got discharged five days later and remained in house quarantine.
The Society for Cyberabad Security Council (SCSC) with support from the Cyberabad police Friday launched an online platform to connect plasma donors with those in need. The new portal aims to ensure all the plasma donors are registered and a database is maintained. A request for plasma will be notified to all registered donors enabling them to connect to the patient’s kin.
In absence of a conclusive treatment for Covid-19, plasma therapy is being considered a promising alternative. In Hyderabad, one could now use the link donateplasma.scsc.in and contact 9000257058, 9490617440.

Karnataka reported 5,007 new COVID19 cases on Friday (24 July). With this, the total number of positive persons in the state has gone up to 85,870. It includes 1,724 deaths and 31,347discharges.
Karnataka reported 5007 new #COVID19 cases on Friday (24 July). With this, the total number of positive persons in the state has gone up to 85870. It includes 1724 deaths and 31347discharges. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/E6Mq90mRiB
An 85-year-old woman from Pune in Maharashtra is garnering praise from across quarters and help amid the coronavirus-induced lockdown after a video of her displaying exemplary stick-fighting skills went viral on social media. Shantabai Pawar was showing off her stick-fighting skills on the streets of the city during lockdown to earn living for her family, that comprises orphaned children she has taken under her care. Her video not only fetched praises but also a number of people came forward with ration and monetary help.
Among them was film actor Riteish Deshmukh who described her as 'warrior aaji' (warrior grandmother) on a micro-blogging site and contacted her. Pawar said she had been learning stick-fighting skills since the age of eight, and would travel to different places to display it. But of late, she was facing a lot of distress as the lockdown had brought everything to a standstill.
Warrior Aaaji Maa...Can someone please get me the contact details of her ... pic.twitter.com/yO3MX9w2nw


No flight will operate to and from the Kolkata airport on July 25 and 29, amid the total lockdown in place across the state on both the days, officials said Friday. "As of now, it has been decided that there will be no flight operations on July 25 and 29," news agency PTI quoted an official at the Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose International (NSCBI) Airport as saying. The West Bengal government has decided to impose complete lockdown two days a week in the state to break the chain of Covid transmission.
All international passengers arriving through flights arranged under air bubbles are subjected to two layers of health screening besides mandatory seven days institutional quarantine at their own cost followed by a seven day home quarantine, officials said on Friday. The arrangements being made for passengers arriving through air bubbles flights were discussed at a high level meeting chaired by Union Home Secretary Ajay Bhalla on Thursday. (PTI)
The Delhi High Court Friday asked the ICMR to issue Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) a clarification that mobile number, government issued identity card, photographs or a residential proof will not be insisted upon for Covid-19 test of mentally-ill homeless people, PTI reported. According to an ICMR advisory of June 19, every person who had to be tested for coronavirus needed to provide a government identity proof and should have a valid phone number for tracing and tracking the individual and his or her contacts.
Neuberg Diagnostics Private Limited has received approval from the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) for COVID-19 testing in Kerala. Neuberg, India's fourth largestpathology player, had earlier received approvals for COVID testing in Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Chennai and Pune, it said in a press release. Kerala had reported 1,078 coronavirus cases on Thursday, the highest single day surge so far. Its infection tally has crossed the 16,000 mark. Aishwarya Vasudevan, Group Chief Operating, Neuberg Diagnostics Private Limited said, as the virus continues to spread globally, India finds itself between Stage 2 and Stage 3 of the disease spread. (PTI)
AIIMS Delhi on Friday administered first dose of Bharat Biotech's Covaxin to a 30-year-old male. The subject will be monitored for two weeks after which he will be given the second dose.The Covid-19 tally in India rose to 12,87,945 on Friday after 49,311 fresh cases were reported within a span of 24 hours. Covaxin is India's Covid-19 vaccine candidate developed by Bharat Biotech India Limited (BBIL) in collaboration with the National Institute of Virology (NIV).
AIIMS Delhi has administered the first dose of Bharat Biotech's Covaxin to a 30-year-old male on Friday. The subject will be monitored for two weeks after which he will be given the second dose.@IndianExpress
 With over 11 lakh cases, India, third only to the United States and Brazil, concerns are raised about its readiness to confront a surge in the cases (AP Photo/Mahesh Kumar A.)
With unabated rise in the coronavirus cases, the Centre has asked all states to stay away from organising large congregation, ensure social distancing and webcast the Independence Day events. In an advisory, the Home Ministry said Covid warriors like doctors, health and sanitation workers should be invited in the ceremony as a recognition of their service of battling the pandemic. It said some people who have recovered from the infection might also be invited.
Amid the race for a vaccine, a World Health Organization (WHO) expert on Wednesday said researchers are making “good progress”, with a handful in late-stage trials, but their first use cannot be expected until early 2021. “We’re making good progress,” Mike Ryan, head of WHO’s emergencies programme, noting that several vaccines were now in phase 3 trials and none had failed, so far, in terms of safety or ability to generate an immune response.
US President Donald Trump has said the United States was leading the world in terms of Covid-19 testing and India was at the second position, underscoring the strong bilateral relationship and his bonhomie with Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
“We’re going to be over 50 million tests. The second country is India with 12 million (tests). Then you have seven million, six million, and four million. I think that we are doing a tremendous amount of testing,” Trump said a White House news conference.
In fact, since April, Trump has on numerous occasions showered praise on PM Modi in his handling of the Covid-19 situation and called Indian-Americans as “great” scientists but also, at the same time, struck a retaliatory tone on the supply of hydroxychloroquine from the country. Interestingly, just weeks before the HCQ fracas, Trump was in India for a bilateral visit — his first as US President.
India coronavirus numbers explained: How to read the serological survey results from Mumbai and Delhi
Results of two different serological surveys, one in Delhi and the other in Mumbai found the presence of novel Coronavirus-specific antibodies in slightly less than 25 per cent of those tested. This could mean that in either of these cities, there were chances that about 25 per cent of the city’s population had already been infected by the virus, if we assume that the disease was uniformly spread in the population.
