Mann ki Baat HIGHLIGHTS: Help will be extended to those affected by locust attack, says PM Modi
PM Narendra Modi Mann Ki Baat Today HIGHLIGHTS: Prime Minister Narendra Modi Sunday addressed the nation through his monthly radio programme ‘Mann Ki Baat’ and said that the road ahead in the fight against the coronavirus was a long one.
The Prime Minister said that India’s fight against Covid-19 is people-driven and is being powered by the innovative spirit of our citizens. He said that it is important to be more vigilant now as a major chunk of the economy has opened up. PM Modi said that there is no class of people who did not suffer due to Covid-19 outbreak, but poor, labourers have been hit the hardest.
Referring to the attack by locusts in various states of the country, PM Modi said that help will be extended to those affected by the attack.
Speaking about Cyclone Amphan, the Prime Minister said that India stands with Odisha and West Bengal, and that the people of these states have shown remarkable courage.
On Saturday, the Centre issued ‘Unlock 1’ guidelines, allowing a phased re-opening of most activities across the country, and restricting the lockdown only to containment zones for a month till June 30. The night curfew was also reduced from 9 pm to 5 am from 7 pm to 7 am till today. Not only do the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) allow re-opening of malls, hotels, restaurants and places of worship from June 8 in Phase I of unwinding, they also allow unfettered movement of goods and persons between states and within states. States have, however, been given the freedom to prohibit certain activities or put suitable restrictions if they deem it necessary for containment of the Covid outbreak. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare will issue standard operating procedures for all these activities which are now being permitted.

Mann Ki Baat HIGHLIGHTS: PM Modi addressed the nation Sunday in his monthly radio programme. Follow this space for updates.
PM Modi said that we realise how big the achievement of Indians is when we look at other countries. "Our population is many times more than other countries, challenges are different still Covid-19 didn't spread so rapidly as in other countries and the fatality rate is also notably lower," he said. 
Prime Minister Narendra Modi Sunday said that innovation at this time of crisis has touched his heart, ANI reported. "A multitude of countrymen from villages and cities, from small scale traders to startups, our labs are devising new ways of fighting against coronavirus," he said.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi said that a major chunk of the economy is active now. "There should be no laxity in maintaining six feet distance (DO Gaj Doori), wearing masks and staying indoors as much as possible," he said, adding that the fight against Covid-19 is being fought strongly due to everyone's support.
Talking about the ongoing coronavirus lockdown, PM Modi said, "When I spoke with you last time in Mann Ki Baat, passenger trains, buses, air services were closed but curbs have been lifted this time. Shramik Special trains, other special trains and flights have resumed with adequate precautionary measures."
Welcome to our live blog. Follow this space for the latest updates on Prime Minister Narendra Modi's address to nation on “Mann Ki Baat”.
Do tune in tomorrow at 11 AM. #MannKiBaat pic.twitter.com/b71yh2NTox
In his last month's Mann Ki Baat in April, PM Modi had said that India's fight against coronavirus was people driven and the virus had made masks an important part of our lives. “In the middle of this pandemic, the farmers are ensuring that no one sleeps hungry in our country. Each person is fighting this war as per their own capacity. Some are waiving off house rent, also some labourers who are in quarantine at a school are whitewashing the school among others,” he said.
The BJP-led NDA government completed the first year of its second term yesterday. The Prime Minister wrote a letter to the nation, saying, "My fellow Indians, as we were moving ahead at fast pace in the fulfilment of hopes and aspirations of our countrymen, the coronavirus global pandemic engulfed our country as well. While on the one hand are powers with great economic resources and state-of-the-art healthcare systems, on the other hand is our country besieged with problems amidst a vast population and limited resources."
