Coronavirus outbreak Highlights: China to probe ‘issues’ related to whistleblower doctor’s death
Coronavirus outbreak Highlights: Forty one more persons tested positive for the novel coronavirus on board the quarantined cruise ship in Japan, bringing the total number of cases on the vessel to 61. The drastic jump in infected passengers on the cruise vessel comes as the cruise ship was under the two-week quarantine with about 3,700 persons on-board.
The official death toll in the epidemic has climbed to 636, while the total number of confirmed cases crossed 31,000, Chinese health officials said on Friday. The outbreak has triggered panic across the globe, with over 200 cases reported overseas. So far, the vast majority of deaths have been in Hubei, though the Philippines and Hong Kong have reported a death each. In India, three confirmed cases of the virus have been reported in Kerala.
On Thursday, China vehemently denied a Taiwan media report that Beijing is under-reporting the death toll and infected cases from the virus outbreak. Tencent, which runs popular social media App WeChat, over the weekend seems to have “inadvertently released what is potentially the actual number of infections and deaths, which were astronomically higher than the official figures,” Taiwan News reported. “The Tencent webpage showed confirmed cases of the Wuhan virus in China as standing at 154,023, ten times the official figure at the time… Most ominously, the death toll listed was 24,589, vastly higher than the 300 officially listed that day,” the report claimed.

The world is facing a chronic shortage of gowns, masks, gloves and other protective equipment in the fight against a spreading coronavirus epidemic, World Health Organization (WHO) chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said on Friday. The UN agency has been sending testing kits, masks, gloves, respirators and gowns to every region, Tedros told the WHO Executive Board in Geneva.
“However the world is facing a chronic shortage of personnel protective equipment, as you might imagine. This afternoon I will be speaking to the pandemic supply chain network to identify the bottlenecks and find solutions and push (for) fairness in distribution of equipment,” he said. Read more...
Scenes of chaos and despair are emerging daily from China’s Hubei province, the landlocked region of 60 million people where the new coronavirus dubbed 2019-nCoV was first identified in December, and where it has since cut a wide, deadly swathe. While cases have spread around the globe, coronavirus’ impact has been most keenly felt in Hubei, which has seen a staggering 97% of all deaths from the illness, and 67% of all patients. The toll, which grows larger every day, reflects a local health system overwhelmed by the fast-moving, alien pathogen, making even the most basic care impossible. It’s also an ongoing illustration of the human cost extracted by the world’s largest-known quarantine, with China effectively locking down the region from Jan. 23 to contain the virus’ spread to the rest of the country, and the world. But Hubei -- known for its car factories and bustling capital Wuhan -- is paying the price, with the mortality rate for coronavirus patients there 3.1%, versus 0.16% for the rest of China. Read more...
Kerala Health Minister KK Shailaja: Kerala withdraws 'state disaster' status given to #Coronavirus. Alert to be continued and health guidelines to be followed. (File Pic) pic.twitter.com/f9dkAkRGzB
A four-year-old Chinese girl in Malaysia who was suffering from the novel coronavirus has fully recovered and will be allowed to return home, Malaysian doctors have confirmed, The Telegraph reported. The girl, who travelled to Malaysia with family, was the first south-east Asian patient to fall ill with the virus outside of China, which has so far killed over 500 and infected more than 28,000 people, mainly in China’s Hubei province. “She is now is good health and has been allowed to return home,” The Telegraph quoted Noor Hisham Abdullah, the Malaysian health ministry’s director general, as saying.The child was diagnosed last week and treated in an isolation ward at a hospital on Langkawi island, a popular tourist destination.
Nepal on Friday gifted 100,000 protective masks to China which is battling against the deadly coronavirus outbreak that has claimed over 630 lives. The decision to gift the masks came in the backdrop of its shortage in China. Foreign Minister Pradip Kumar Gyawali and Health Minister Bhanubakta Dhakal handed over the masks to China's ambassador to Nepal Hou Yanqi at an event in Kathmandu. A high-level meeting of the Nepal government on Thursday decided to dispatch one lakh protective masks to China. (PTI)
Forget face masks and rubber gloves. The best way to avoid the coronavirus is frequent hand washing, according to a medical adviser to the world’s airlines. The virus can’t survive long on seats or armrests, so physical contact with another person carries the greatest risk of infection on a flight, said David Powell, a physician and medical adviser to the International Air Transport Association. Masks and gloves do a better job of spreading bugs than stopping them, he said. (Bloomberg)
Amid fears over coronavirus, a Chinese national Friday “vomited” on an Air India flight from New Delhi to Pune, delaying the airline’s operations on that route. Air India spokesperson Dhananjay Kumar said the “unwell” passenger was later de-boarded and admitted to a local hospital. His samples have been sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) in Pune for testing. The aircraft, which was scheduled to return to New Delhi, was delayed by over four hours after passengers and the flight crew raised concern due to the novel virus, which spreads through human-to-human transmission. Read full story here
Hong Kong Airlines said on Friday that it will slash 400 jobs and cut operations given weak travel demand because of the coronavirus outbreak, adding to financial woes for the city's second-largest carrier. "As uncertainty looms with the evolving nature of this global issue, weak travel demand will likely continue into the summer season and we need to take further action to stay afloat," an airline spokesman said in an email to Reuters. "There has never been a more challenging time in Hong Kong Airlines' history as of now. These decisions are difficult but had to be made to keep the airline alive," he added.
Amid fears over coronavirus, a Chinese national Friday “vomited” on an Air India flight from New Delhi to Pune, delaying the airline’s operations on that route. Air India spokesperson Dhananjay Kumar said the “unwell” passenger was later de-boarded and admitted to a local hospital. His samples have been sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) in Pune for testing.
The aircraft, which was scheduled to return to New Delhi, was delayed by over four hours after passengers and the flight crew raised concern due to the novel virus, which is transmitted through human touch.
According to health department officials at Naidu Hospital in Pune, the Chinese traveller is under observation. “We are looking at his travel history and samples have been sent to the National Institute of Virology (NIV) for tests,” said the official.
More details coming in from US evacuation planes that left Wuhan recently. There were about 300 passengers, mostly US citizens, in the planes. One of the flights had room to accommodate more than 60 Canadians, who will disembark on a stopover in Vancouver, British Columbia, before the remaining passengers continue on to the United States, a State Department spokeswoman told Reuters.
The plane stopping in Vancouver will fly on to Marine Corps Air Station Miramar in Southern California, the Pentagon said in a separate statement. The second aircraft is headed for Omaha, Nebraska, by way of Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas, following a refueling stop in California, the Defense Department said. Both planes are due to arrive on Friday.
China's anti-graft watchdog announced on Friday an investigation after the death of a whistleblower doctor sparked anger over the government's handling of the coronavirus emergency, news agency Reuters reported. The commission would send investigators to Wuhan to probe "issues raised by the people in connection with Dr. Li Wenliang."
Li, an ophthalmologist at a hospital in Wuhan, the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak, died on Friday after saying he had contracted the virus, sparking a wave of public mourning. He had earlier revealed he was one of eight people reprimanded by Wuhan police last month for "spreading rumours" about the virus.
Vice-President Venkaiah Naidu on Friday congratulated the Air India team that evacuated over 600 Indians from Wuhan, the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak. "Many compliments to the 34-member Team Air INDIA for flying into #coronavirus-hit Wuhan city & evacuating more than 600 Indians onboard two special flights," he tweeted. Here's the story of Wuhan evacuation
The death of Chinese doctor Li Wenliang after he became infected with the novel coronavirus has sparked an unprecedented outpouring of grief in mainland China. Wenliang had issued an early warning about the coronavirus outbreak before it was officially recognised.. He shared the finding with some former medical school classmates so they could take precautions, in a WeChat group message that said: “Seven cases of SARS confirmed.”
A letter to Li from the Wuhan police bureau on Jan. 3 said he had "severely disrupted social order" with his WeChat messages. He was asked to sign the letter as a promise to stop such illegal behaviour immediately and told that if he refused to comply he would face criminal charges. His death shows risk of Asia’s fake news crackdown. Read more here
China stocks fell on Friday, heading for their worst week since May, as a sharply rising death toll from a virus outbreak kept investors on tenterhooks despite policymakers' efforts to calm nerves. At the midday break, the Shanghai Composite index was 0.6% lower at 2,849.51, down 4.3% for the week.
US President Donald Trump expressed confidence in China's strength and resilience in confronting its coronavirus outbreak during a conversation with President Xi Jinping on Thursday, a White House spokesman said. The two leaders agreed to continue extensive communication and cooperation between both sides, the spokesman added
A global rundown of the latest figures of cases and deaths released by government officials due to coronavirus. China has 636 deaths and 31,161 confirmed cases on the mainland. In addition, Hong Kong has had 22 cases, including one death. Macao has had 10 cases. * Japan: 86 * Singapore: 30 * Thailand: 25 * South Korea: 24 * Australia: 14 * Germany: 13 * United States: 12 * Taiwan: 16 * Malaysia: 14 * Vietnam: 12 * France: 6 * United Arab Emirates: 5 * Canada: 6 * India: 3 * Philippines: 3 cases, including 1 death * Russia: 2 * Italy: 2 * Britain: 3 * Belgium: 1 * Nepal: 1 * Sri Lanka: 1 * Sweden: 1 * Spain: 1 * Cambodia: 1 * Finland: 1
French oil major Total has rejected a force majeure notice from a liquefied natural gas (LNG) buyer in China, the first global energy supplier to publicly push back against firms backing out of deals amid the coronavirus outbreak. Concerns that Chinese companies could back out of contracts because of the coronavirus epidemic have slowed down spot crude oil and LNG sales into China, the world's top energy consumer, increasing global supplies and depressing prices of energy products, news agency Reuters reported
Chinese President Xi Jinping spoke on Friday with US President Donald Trump on the novel coronavirus outbreak, emphasising that China has "spared no effort in fighting the epidemic", state media reported. China is fully confident and capable of defeating the epidemic, and the long-term trend of the country's economic development will not change, Xi said. He also said that China was gradually achieving results, news agency Reuters reported
Two evacuation planes carrying US citizens out of Wuhan have left the coronavirus epicenter, according to a State Department spokesperson. The State Department statement did not say how many evacuees were on the flights or where in the United States they were headed. 
As the number of confirmed cases in Japan rises to 81 — highest after the epidemic's epicenter China — Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has ordered his government to take "all necessary steps" to mitigate the impact of the virus outbreak on the economy, including tapping state budget reserves. The government will compile emergency measures to respond to the impact of the outbreak as early as next week, Abe was quoted as saying by Japan's Jiji news agency. Japan is set to host the 2020 Summer Olympics over July and August. The CEO of the Tokyo Organising Committee has said the outbreak could "throw cold water" on the growing momentum of the Games, news agency Reuters reported
 French lab scientists in hazmat gear inserting liquid in test tube manipulate potentially infected patient samples at Pasteur Institute in Paris, Thursday, Feb. 6, 2020. Scientists at the Pasteur Institute developed and shared a quick test for the new virus that is spreading worldwide, and are using genetic information about the coronavirus to develop a potential vaccine and treatments. (AP Photo/Francois Mori)
Britain, Germany and Italy have announced more cases of the new virus from China, bringing the total number of confirmed cases in Europe to 31.
Japan's fourth chartered flight has returned to Tokyo from Wuhan, the epicenter of a viral outbreak in central China, carrying 198 Japanese evacuees and their Chinese spouses. Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga told reporters Friday that so far nobody was seen having obvious symptoms of the coronavirus infection. He says they will be all screened at a hospital before being sent to a government facility near Tokyo for quarantine. At 86, Japan now has the highest number of cases outside mainland China. On Friday, Japan reported 41 more cases aboard a quarantined cruise ship.
Art Basel Hong Kong, a major cultural and business event for the city, has been canceled amid the virus outbreak. The annual art fair, which drew more than 80,000 people last year, had been scheduled to take place from March 19 to 21.
Meanwhile, Li Wenliang, a Chinese doctor who issued an early warning about the coronavirus outbreak before it was officially recognised died of the virus on Friday, triggering a wave of public mourning and anger on social media. The World Health Organization said on Twitter that it was "deeply saddened" by news of his death.
Toyota Motor Corp on Friday said production at all of its plants in China would remain suspended through Feb. 16, joining a growing number of automakers facing output stoppages due to supply chain issues as the coronavirus outbreak spreads. The Japanese automaker, which operates 12 vehicle and vehicle components factories in China, said it would extend its production stoppage "after considering various factors, including guidelines from local and region governments, parts supply, and logistics." The decision extends Toyota's initial plans to suspend operations through Sunday, and comes as the threat from the coronavirus crisis closes in on the global auto industry.
🔴 Explained: What is the drug a China college wants to patent to fight coronavirus
🔴 ‘They are heroes’: Pics of Chinese medics with mask marks go viral amid coronavirus outbreak
🔴 Coronavirus ourbreak: ICMR gets nod for ‘restricted use’ of two anti-HIV drugs
🔴 In China, the spread of the novel coronavirus reveals how its bureaucracy fails to work
