India Coronavirus Updates, 23 June: Bombay HC asks Centre about use of train coaches as Covid centres
India Coronavirus Latest Update: With the coronavirus killing over 14,000 people, India now ranks eighth in the global death toll, according to John Hopkins University. The country now has over 4.40 lakh infections of which 1.78 lakh are active cases, while 2.48 lakh people have already recovered. States like Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Andhra Pradesh have steadily increased their capacity to test with 10,000 to 20,000 samples being tested daily.
“Fatality mitigation” apart from testing and contact tracing has emerged as a priority in government’s Covid-19 containment plan as epidemiologists and experts repeatedly say that deaths and not cases are the key metric to understand the effectiveness of a country’s containment plans. (Follow Coronavirus LIVE UPDATES )
Here are the top developments from the country today
The Bombay High Court Tuesday directed the Central government to explain steps taken by the Railways to convert train coaches into COVID-19 isolation or quarantine centres and if ICU facilities can also be made available in them.
A division bench of Chief Justice Dipankar Datta and Justice M S Karnik was hearing a public interest litigation filed by Mumbai resident raising concerns about measures taken to tackle the COVID-19 pandemic, PTI reported. “The Union of India shall file an affidavit indicating the steps taken by the Western Railway as well as the Central Railway to convert coaches into isolation/quarantine centres and why ICU facilities in coaches is not considered necessary,” the court said.
Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Tuesday wrote to Union Home Minister Amit Shah, demanding doctors and nurses from the ITBP and the Army to run a 10,000-bed COVID-19 care facility being set up in south Delhi, news agency PTI reported citing sources.
They said the chief minister has also invited Shah to visit the upcoming facility on the sprawling campus of spiritual organisation Radha Soami Satsang Beas (RSSB).
Karnataka Chief Minister B S Yediyurappa Tuesday said that the Covid-19 related fatalities in the state were far less compared to other major states, as he called on people and front line corona warriors infected by the virus not to lose courage. The Chief Minister made the statement following the alleged suicide of a constable attached with the Karnataka State Reserve Police after he tested positive for COVID-19.
“The total number of COVID related deaths in the state is very less compared to other major states. There is no reason for any infected citizen or government employees to lose courage. The government is always with you,” a tweet on the Chief Minister’s official twitter handle said.
The outpatient department (OPD) services at All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS), New Delhi are all set to resume from June 25, after being shut for almost three months. The OPD services at the institute will initially begin with the follow-up patients and later will be extended to new cases.
“The date has been finalised in the meeting and the institute is soon going to issue a circular to all the departments. The OPD services will start for all the follow-up cases after providing the teleconsultation. All the departments be operational,” said a senior doctor from the hospital’s administration.
On March 18, the medical institute has sent an advisory to the OPD patients on their registered phone numbers, requesting them to postpone the OPD appointments.
Out of the 50,000 “Made in India” ventilators sanctioned under the PM Cares fund to combat coronavirus, nearly 3,000 have been manufactured and over 1,300 have been delivered to various states, an official said Tuesday.
Out of Rs 3,100 crore, nearly Rs 2,000 crore was earmarked for the purchase of these ventilators, and an additional 14,000 ventilators are expected to be delivered to all the states and UT’s by the end of this month.
The states that received the ventilators include Maharashtra (275), Delhi (275), Gujarat (175), Bihar (100), Karnataka (90), Rajasthan (75).
There has been a sudden surge in novel Coronavirus cases in Telangana. The state has discovered almost 3,500 cases in the last one week, which is more than 40 per cent of its entire caseload till now. The surge has coincided with an increase in the number of samples being tested, and the two things are not unrelated. It is only after severe criticism and repeated orders of the High Court that the state has finally increased the number of samples being tested. With testing ramped up, Telangana is likely to emerge as one of the biggest trouble spots in the country in the next few days.
One of the servitors of Shree Jagannath Temple here tested positive for COVID-19 during mandatory testing of priests and police personnel ahead of the annual Rath Yatra on Tuesday, a senior official said. The servitor will not be part of any ritual related to the Rath Yatra, he said. Modifying its earlier order, the apex court on Monday gave the go-ahead for the Rath Yatra after taking note of the Odisha government’s assurance that it “can be held in a limited way without public attendance”.
Election Commissioner Sushil Chandra said that patients with coronavirus will be allowed to vote through postal ballots as Election Commission is to ensure that the pandemic does not affect voter turnout in the Bihar polls to be held later this year.
Chandra said the Law Ministry has accepted the EC’s proposal on this issue, following which a new category of “Covid-19 suspect or affected persons” has been added under Rule 27A of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961.
The eligibility criterion requires the voter to be tested positive in a government healthcare facility oor one designated by the government as a Covid hospital. Voters under “home quarantine or institutional quarantine” can also avail the postal ballot option, he said.
Former Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy Tuesday said that the entire state of Bengaluru should be put under a lockdown instead of sealing a few places as coronavirus cases in the city continue to rise.
Taking to Twitter, Kumaraswamy said “Stop playing with human lives. It will not serve any purpose to seal a few areas. If you care for the human lives in Bengaluru, shut down the city totally for 20 days. Else, Bengaluru will become another Brazil. People’s lives are more important than the economy.” He also emphasised the need for swift implementation of a relief package and that the “mere announcement of the package by the state govt. or drivers, weavers, fishermen and various other sections was not enough.
Meanwhile, Karnataka Medical Education Minister K Sudhakar’s wife and daughter have tested positive for COVID-19, a day after his father was confirmed to have been infected with the virus.
The Centre and the CBSE told the Supreme Court on Tuesday that discussion on whether to scrap the remaining exams of Class XII from July 1-15 in view of the increasing number of COVID-19 cases is at an advanced stage and a decision is likely to be taken on Wednesday. Solicitor General Tushar Mehta informed a bench headed by Justice A M Khanwilkar that the government and the board are aware of the anxiety of students, and authorities will take a decision on the issue soon.
A day after Saudi Arabia announced that “very limited number” of people will be allowed to perform Haj this year due to the coronavirus, the government on Tuesday decided to refund the application money of pilgrims without any deduction. Saudi Arabia has never canceled the hajj in the nearly 90 years since the nation’s establishment.
Presided by the Bengal CM Mamta Banerjee, the West Bengal government will convene an all-party meeting to discuss and review the coronavirus situation on Wednesday. The meet will likely be attended by leaders of all political parties having representation in the state Assembly, Home Secretary Alapan Bandyopadhyay said Monday.
As per the UT’s order anyone staying in Chandigarh for over 72 hours will have to be placed in 14-day home quarantine. However, this order will not apply to visitors who spend less than 72 hours in Chandigarh. “This will be convenient for business executives and government employees, among others, who come to Chandigarh for official work and leave after a short stay,” a statement by UT administration said.

