Coronavirus April 26 Highlights: Delhi sees big jump in number of Covid-19 cases
Last week into the extended lockdown, the confirmed cases of coronavirus in India neared the 27,000-mark. As per the last update by the Health Ministry, the total number of cases climbed to 26,917, including 826 deaths. Maharashtra continues to be the worst-affected state, followed by Gujarat.  Delhi saw a big jump in the number of cases, reporting 293 new cases on Sunday.
Earlier today, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in his monthly radio address ‘Mann ki Baat’, called the fight against coronavirus in India ‘people-driven’ and asked people to shun any complacency that they will not be infected by the virus. This was his second radio address since the initial lockdown was announced on March 25 to contain the transmission of the virus. In his last Mann ki Baat address on March 29, the Prime Minister had sought forgiveness for the inconvenience caused to people by the unprecedented lockdown measures.
Meanwhile, the World Health Organization has warned that recovering from coronavirus might not protect people from reinfection as the death toll from the pandemic crossed 200,000 around the globe. The United States is the hardest-hit country by far in the pandemic, recording more than 51,500 deaths and over 890,000 detected infections.
Follow Indian Express COVID-19 tracker for latest updates

Ahead of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s meeting with Chief Ministers, the Congress Sunday asked the government to come out with a comprehensive and holistic plan for the next two months, including a calibrated exit strategy for the lockdown. It also asked the government to explain why it is conducting only 39,000 tests a day, against its capacity of one lakh.
“Is there a comprehensive, holistic strategy, which the Union government is going to present to the Chief Ministers. That this is the plan going forth over the next two months. Because on May 3, COVID-19 is not going to disappear. The virus, in the absence of a vaccine, is here to stay and therefore we have to prepare ourselves, we have to prepare our people to live with the virus,” Congress spokesperson Manish Tewari told reporters. Read more here
Badruddin Shaikh, 67, a senior Congress corporator and former leader of opposition in the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC), succumbed to COVID 19 late Sunday, after being on ventilator for more than a week. Shaikh had tested positive on April 15 and was admitted at AMC run SVP hospital. He had hypertension and diabetes and had recently undergone a heart surgery.
Read more here
With 293 more people being confirmed positive for COVID-19 on Sunday, the total number of coronavirus cases in the national capital rose to 2,918, according to the Delhi government's health department. The total number of cases on Saturday stood at 2,625. As many as 877 patients have been cured till now, while 54 have died of the disease.
🏥Delhi Health Bulletin and Testing Status - 26th April 2020 🏥#DelhiFightsCorona pic.twitter.com/baPmKdVXVT
With reports of rise in domestic violence cases ever since the Covid-19 lockdown was imposed in India, the Delhi State Legal Services Authority (DSLSA) has said victims can reach out to them on a tollfree helpline, and also through WhatsApp or SMS.
The DSLSA revealed the information before the Delhi High Court recently, adding that once a missed call or a message is received, the victim is contacted with competent legal aid and advice.
The DSLAS’s submissions were made during hearing of a petition by an NGO — All India Council of Human Rights Liberties and Social Justice – that sought an intervention by the High Court for effective measures to help victims of domestic violence.
On the 33rd day of the lockdown, India recorded the highest one-day rise of 1,975 novel coronavirus cases, taking the total number of cases close to the 27000-mark, including 826 deaths. Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in his monthly radio program ‘Mann ki Baat’, called the fight against Covid-19 ‘people-driven’ and asked people to shun any complacency that they will not be infected by the virus. Here is a list of striking stories from across the country on the 33rd day of lockdown.
At a time when social distancing has emerged as the watchword for fighting the coronavirus pandemic, a YouTuber from Tripura has made a unique electric motorcycle to create awareness among people. In keeping with guidelines issued by the WHO, the electric bike has a one-metre distance between each seat.
The bike is the brainchild of Partha Saha of Aralia village near Agartala. Speaking to indianexpress.com, Saha said neither he wishes to popularise the vehicle as a commercial product nor would he seek permission from the transport department.
The number of COVID-19 cases in Maharashtra crossed the 8,000-mark on Sunday after 440 more people were found infected. With the new cases, the number of such patients in the state has now reached 8,068. So far, 1,188 patients across the state have been discharged after recovery.
The current count of COVID19 patients in the state of Maharashtra is 8068. Today newly 440 patients have been identified as positive for Covid19. From these,1188 Covid19 patients have been cured and discharged from the respective hospitals.#CoronaVirusUpdates #MeechMazaRakshak
Tamil Nadu has become the second state after Maharashtra to report more than 1000 recoveries. As many as 60 persons were discharged from various hospitals in the state today, taking the total number of recoveries to 1,020. Meanwhile, a 42-year old man died of the virus in Chennai, the 24th victim to the infection in Tamil Nadu. The total number of cases increased to 1885 after 64 more people were tested positive. Out of this, only 841 patients remain Covid-19 active.
Around 25 migrant labourers from Jamnagar district who were going to their native places in Madhya Pradesh in a tractor amid the coronavirus lockdown were stopped by police near Morbi town on Sunday. A team of Morbi ‘B’ Division police posted at Navlakhi check-post on the outskirts of Morbi town stopped a tractor ferrying around 25 labourers, including women and children, while it was coming from the neighbouring Jamnagar district on Sunday afternoon. “The labourers said that they were working on agricultural fields at Latipar village in Dhrol taluka of Jamanagar district and that they were on their way back to Madhya Pradesh,” P B Gadhvi, Inspector of Morbi ‘B’ Division police station said. Read more here

Dressed in a simple white kurta and dhoti, and his face covered with a mask, Kanti Amliyar embarks on a routine tour of his village to identify those who are in need of vegetables during the coronavirus lockdown.
While several vegetable farmers have not been able to sell their produce amid the lockdown, Amliyar has turned the crisis into an opportunity to serve the needy. The 55-year-old farmer from Dahod has been distributing vegetable packets for free at his village, Usarvan.
Over 40 per cent of the villagers at Usarvan, which has a population of around 5,000 people, are migrant and contractual labourers who have returned to their native village and are facing a resource crunch.
With the death of a 45-year-old Covid-19 patient in Bengaluru on Sunday, the disease toll in Karnataka rose to 19. According to the Department of Health and Family Welfare Services, the deceased — a resident of Bengaluru Urban district – had been admitted to a city hospital on Friday.
“P 465 was diagnosed with Severe Acute Respiratory Infection (SARI). She had a medical history of Pneumonia and was diabetic with a past history of Tuberculosis. (She) died on Sunday (April 26) at a designated hospital in Bengaluru,” the official statement read.
Meanwhile, only three new cases (all contacts of earlier patients) were confirmed in the state on Sunday — the least daily additions recorded in the last fortnight or so. Of the new cases, two are from Kalaburagi while the other is from Dakshina Kannada.
No fresh novel coronavirus case has been reported in Himachal Pradesh for the last three days, a senior health official told PTI on Sunday. Of the 176 samples sent for testing on Sunday, 38 tested negative while reports of the rest are awaited, Additional Chief Secretary (Health) R D Dhiman said. These tests are being conducted at Dr Rajendra Prasad Government Medical College (RPGMC) in Tanda, Indira Gandhi Medical College (IGMC) in Shimla and Central Research Institute (CRI) in Kasauli in Solan district. Himachal Pradesh has so far reported 41 coronavirus cases. While 22 patients have recovered, 13 are undergoing treatment.
Kerala Minister of Health & Social Justice, K K Shailaja said that 11 new cases of the coronavirus infection were confirmed in the state today - six persons from Idukki district and five in Kottayam district. While one person has returned to Kerala from overseas, three have come back from neighbouring states and seven are cases of local transmission. This includes one Doctor in Idukki district and two healthcare workers in Kottayam district.At the same time, four patients under treatment for Covid-19 have recovered. One patient each from Thiruvananthapuram, Malappuram, Kannur and Kasargod districts are those who tested negative today. This takes the total number of recovered cases in Kerala to 342 as 123 patients are still under treatment in different hospitals in the state.
Taking to Twitter, Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh said that 150 students from Kota are on their way to Punjab in 7 buses and will reach tomorrow morning. "Also, 60 Punjab Govt buses are going to Jaisalmer to ferry around 2,700 Punjabis who are stranded in 5 relief camps there.", he added.
Happy to share with you all that 150 students from Kota are on their way to Punjab in 7 buses and will reach tomorrow morning. Also, 60 Punjab Govt buses are going to Jaisalmer to ferry around 2,700 Punjabis who are stranded in 5 relief camps there.
Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) chief Mohan Bhagwat Sunday told Sangh workers that they should continue with coronavirus relief work till the pandemic ends, and help all those affected due to the COVID-19 crisis “without discrimination”.
In an online address, Bhagwat said the RSS is active during lockdown, with its work having taken the shape of relief activities, PTI reported.
The RSS chief said the organisation was working to create awareness about the Covid-19 pandemic, while observing all rules and precautions during the lockdown.
Accusing Mamata Banerjee of failing to tackle the spread of Covid-19 in West Bengal, Union Minister and West Bengal BJP leader Babul Supriyo said that the Chief Minister’s ‘publicity over pandemic’ needs to be opposed in order to save the state from the virus.
“West Bengal govt’s failure in tackling Covid-19 in the state is out in the open. All of us have to unite and stand against Mamata Banerjee’s 1. Politics Over Lives 2. Publicity Over Pandemic, only then we will be able to save Bengal from corona,” Supriyo tweeted with a picture in which he along with five other leaders is seen wearing masks and holding placards against the ruling state government, with hashtag #SaveBengalFromCorona written on it.
West Bengal govt's failure in tackling #COVID19 in the state is out in the open.All of us have to unite and stand against #MamataBanerjee's 1. Politics Over Lives2. Publicity Over Pandemic,only then we will be able to #SaveBengalFromCorona @swapan55 @MenonArvindBJP@BJP4Bengal pic.twitter.com/c83fT3Y1dn
Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray on Sunday said that the decision on the relaxation of restrictions in the state will be taken after a review of the situation once the national lockdown ends on May 3. He said this during his televised address over the coronavirus situation in the state.
“The national lockdown, which has been extended till May 3, will be reviewed once we get stock of the situation next week. We will decide our next steps on relaxation of the lockdown after that,” Thackeray said.
CM Uddhav Balasaheb Thackeray addressing the State https://t.co/yjy7PUQ0mP
According to Health Ministry’s latest update, the total number of cases climbed to 26,917. The number of active COVID-19 cases stood at 20,177 while 5,913 people were cured and discharged, and one patient has migrated, the ministry said. With 1,975 new cases and 47 casualties in the past 24 hours, the death toll is pegged at 826. Maharashtra continues to be the worst-affected state, followed by Gujarat.
#covid2019India update: 26917 cases, 826 deaths ⁦@IndianExpress⁩ pic.twitter.com/72ODjhrm7W
The Maharashtra government is “suppressing” the enormity of the COVID-19 pandemic and refusing to test suspected asymptomatic patients, senior BJP leader and former chief minister Devendra Fadnavis said on Sunday.
The people of the state are paying a heavy price because of the poor response to the crisis by the Shiv Sena-Congress-NCP alliance government in the state, the Leader of Opposition in the Assembly alleged.
“Even in this time of crisis, there is neither cohesion between the ruling alliance partners nor any coordination among the ministries of the state government…people are paying a heavy price for it,” Fadnavis told PTI in an interview.
Assistant Director of Health Services (ADHS), West Bengal, Biplab Kanti Dasgupta died in the wee hours of Sunday due to coronavirus. He became the first frontline health worker of West Bengal, who died with covid-19. The 58-year-old health official was diagnosed covid positive on April 17 and was admitted to a private hospital in Salt Lake. He was diabetic and also a patient of hypertension.
 The Centre has issued orders allowing shops and markets in rural areas and stand-alone shops in urban areas to open for sale (Express Photo: Srinivas K)
The nationwide tally of coronavirus positive patients neared 25,000 on Saturday with fresh cases getting detected in Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh among other places, but the government said the daily growth rate has dipped to 6 per cent and some states began relaxing some lockdown conditions by allowing more shops to open.
Late Friday night, as the Centre issued orders allowing shops and markets in rural areas and stand-alone shops in urban areas to open for sale of even non-essential items for the first time since the COVID-19 lockdown, states reacted with caution.
As confusion prevailed over its exemptions given to certain category of shops across the country on Friday, the MHA issued multiple clarifications on Saturday to clear the air. On the category of shops, the MHA said, “In rural areas, all shops, except those in shopping malls are allowed to open. In urban areas, all standalone shops, neighbourhood shops & shops in residential complexes are allowed to open. Shops in markets/market complexes and shopping malls are not allowed to open.”
The MHA also clarified there would be no sale of liquor, paan or tobacco products and that “sale by e-commerce companies will continue to be permitted for essential goods only”. It has also been clarified that none of these exemptions would apply to containment zones and hotspots.
It also said that in reading its guidelines, it must be remembered that exemptions are only for shops selling items and not those providing services. “In view of queries coming from various sections of society, it is clarified that all restaurants, salons and barber shops would remain closed. They render services & the relaxations given under #lockdown restrictions yesterday pertain only to shops selling items,” MHA said.
It appeared states were once again caught unawares by the Centre.  A month ago, on March 24, when the Centre announced the first phase of the lockdown, states were left to manage its sudden consequences such as the massive disruption in supply chain, and migrant labour walking hundreds of miles to their homes. Some states, including one ruled by the BJP, suggested that adequate discussions had not been held with them before the announcement.
No paediatric expertise available due to lockdown, Army doctors perform life-saving surgery on day-old baby
Doctors at Military Hospital in Punjab’s Pathankot had to perform a complicated surgery on a one-day-old baby with rare congenital anomaly of intestines without a pediatrician or neonatal expert as they could not arrange one due to restrictions in place because of the nationwide lockdown in view of COVID-19 outbreak.
 Team of doctors and nurses at Military Hospital Pathankot with the new born baby and the mother. Express
A defence spokesperson said that it was not feasible to take the baby to the nearest medical facility at Chandimandir, where the requisite expertise was available.
In an art-deco building in the heart of Brussels, Belgium’s leading scientists gather daily to announce the country’s coronavirus toll. It’s been grim reading.
 In this photograph taken from behind a window, a medical staffer works in the intensive care ward for Covid-19 patients at a hospital during a partial lockdown to prevent the spread of coronavirus in Hasselt, Belgium (AP Photo/Francisco Seco)
