Coronavirus July 30 updates: Lockdown in Bihar extended till August 16; flight restrictions to Kolkata from 6 cities to continue till Aug 15
Bihar government on Thursday extended the Lockdown due to coronavirus in Bihar till August 16. The government has imposed additional restrictions, in-state headquarters, district headquarters, sub-divisional headquarters, block headquarters and all municipal areas in the state from August 1-16 in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic.
Coronavirus India Live Updates
Meanwhile, flight restrictions to Kolkata from 6 cities, including Delhi, will remain in place till August 15, according to the NSCBI Airport authorities.
As many as 52,123 fresh Covid cases were registered in the last 24 hours, taking the total to 15,83,792 cases. The death toll also rose to 34,968 from 34,193, according to data released. There are currently 5,28,242 active cases of coronavirus infection in the country presently and the recovery rate among Covid patients was recorded at 64.44 per cent, while the fatality rate was at 2.21 per cent. Late on Wednesday, the government allowed gymnasiums and yoga institutes to function from August 5 and revoked night curfew even as all other activities banned earlier continue to remain prohibited.
Globally, 16,959,936 people have been infected with the novel coronavirus. The death toll stood at 665,581. The United States continued to remain the worst affected followed by Brazil and India.

The Jammu and Kashmir government on Thursday decided to enforce 14-day home quarantine for all those coming to the Union Territory by air, rail and road. The administration shall also take their samples for COVID-19 test provided they have valid contactable mobile number with Aarogya Setu App downloaded on their phone.
Pointing out that State Executive Committee of the Disaster Management, Relief Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Department has issued revised quarantine procedures and protocols to be followed for all incoming passengers by Air, Rail and Road into Jammu and Kashmir, an order issued by SEC member secretary said that all of them ``shall e 100 per cented tested for COVID 19 antigen using the RTPCR or Rapid Antigen Test or any other prescribed method’’.
All the passengers coming to the Union Territory by air, rail and road will be tested for Covid-19 using the RTPCR or Rapid Antigen test, or any other prescribe method and of them, those having valid contactble mobile number with Aarogya Setu App downloaded on phone will be sent for home quarantine for 14 days, or till their test results are reported negative. Of them, those having ``a valid contactable mobile number with the Aarogya Setu APP downloaded on their phones shall be sent for 14 days home quarantine, or till their test results are reported negative’’.
Those without a valid contactable phone number with the Aarogya Setu app downloaded on their phones, they will be sent to Administrative/institutional Quarantine or Paid Quarantine for 14 days or till their test results are reported negative, in which case they are released for Home Quarantine, the order said. However, the event of any of them testing positive, the protocol for COVID-19 positive patients will be followed, it added.
(Inputs from Express News Service, Jammu)
Announcing further easing of curbs, the Karnataka government on Thursday said there will be no lockdowns on Sundays in the State from August 2, as it issued Unlock 3.0 guidelines in line with the Centre's norms.
In view of the rising coronavirus cases, the government had imposed total lockdown on Sundays starting from July 5. Also restrictions on the movement of individuals during the night (night curfew from 9 pm-5 am) have been removed under unlock 3.0.
For the first time since the coronavirus lockdown came into force on March 25, the government has allowed the opening of yoga institutes and gymnasiums from August 5. The order said, Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for this will be issued by the Ministry of Health & FamilyWelfare (MoHFW) and Department of Health and Family Welfare, Government of Karnataka. (PTI)
Teerth-purohits of Gangotri have withdrawn their decision against allowing pilgrims from outside Uttarakhand to visit the Himalayan temple after being warned of stern legal action by the Chardham Devasthanam Board.
The priests withdrew the decision after it was conveyed to them that the temple is managed by the Chardham Devasthanam Board and they cannot stop any pilgrim from visiting the temple in violation of its orders, said Tehsildar Pratap Singh Chauhan who was sent to Gangotri by the district magistrate to talk to the priests. There is no bar on any pilgrim with proper documents visiting the temple, Chauhan said. (PTI)
Kerala Chief Minister, Shri Pinarayi Vijayan Thursday said that home care isolation as per ICMR guidelines will be implemented in the state on a trial basis, initially for the Covid infected healthcare workers.
Addressing the media, the Chief Minister said, “Based on the ICMR’s guidelines and the recommendations of the expert committee, home care isolation will be implemented in Kerala for asymptomatic patients. Majority of the people infected by Covid have no symptoms and they do not require much treatment. They are placed in CFLTCs to prevent the spread of the disease to others. These patients can be at home but must fully comply with isolation conditions. Home care isolation is being implemented on an experimental basis for healthcare workers. They are being selected initially because they are aware of the system. But at the same time, no one is being forced into home isolation. Interested healthcare workers will have to give an affidavit.”
The Manipur government Thursday extended the total lockdown in the state till August 6 after the state reported its third COVID-19 fatality. The victim, a 48 years old man from Langol Imphal West district succumbed at the Regional Institute of Medical Sciences (RIMS) on Thursday around 11 am. The report comes close on the heels of the death of second COVID-19 patient at the hospital. 
The Chief Secretary in the order has directed all the deputy commissioners of the districts to strictly enforce the total lockdown and curfew. Manipur Chief Minister last Wednesday announced total lockdown and curfew for seven days with a sudden surged in the COVID-19 positive cases in the state. Since then, the entire state was under complete curfew starting from 2 pm of Thursday.
(Inputs from Jimmy Leivon, Imphal) 
Restriction on flights to Kolkata from 6 cities, including Delhi, extended up to August 15: NSCBI Airport authorities.
The government has imposed additional restrictions, in-state headquarters, district headquarters, sub-divisional headquarters, block headquarters, and all municipal areas in the state from August 1-16 in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Bihar government has extended the lockdown imposed in the state till August 16.
Bihar lockdown extended till 16 August @IndianExpress
Kerala on Thursday reported 506 new cases of Covid-19 in the state. Out of the total new cases, as many as 375 were infected through local contacts, Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan informed during a press brief.
#IndiaFightsCOVID19 #KeralaCovid19 Kerala reports 506 cases today till noon. 375 of them through local contacts. 794 recovered. CM said list of positive for the day is not final @IndianExpress
With the coronavirus pandemic affecting consumers’ behaviour and purchasing pathways, new fashion trends are now emerging across the world.
Global fashion search platform Lyst analysed the shopping behaviours of more than nine million people per month over a three-month period from April to June. According to the 2020 Lyst Index report, athleisure, sandals, and face masks are becoming the most popular fashion choices now.
The Mamata Banerjee-led West Bengal government on Thursday issued fresh guidelines for Unlock 3.0.
Under these, schools, colleges, educational institutions, cinema halls, swimming pools, parks will remain closed while Yoga centers and gyms will be allowed to open from August 5.
Social, political, and religious gatherings will also not be allowed.
Last month, a report published by the US-based Centers for Disease Control and Prevention had underscored the importance of wearing face-masks by citing a case study of a hair salon in Missouri. Despite two stylists at the salon having confirmed coronavirus infections with symptoms, nearly 140 people who interacted with them finished their 14-day quarantine periods with no signs of illness. The reason: the stylists wore face coverings.
Now in Kerala’s Alappuzha district, a similar case study, though much larger in scale, has emerged.
The benefits of wearing face coverings and gloves have come to light after a total of 2,123 people are believed to have been spared from contracting the coronavirus infection after visiting a laboratory where four staff members tested positive for the virus. On Wednesday (July 29), health and local body officials in Aryad block panchayat were relieved when all of them completed their two-week mandatory quarantine with no symptoms of the infection. Click here to read our report.
It’s dog eat dog in the world of COVID-19 vaccines.
That’s the fear of global health agencies planning a scheme to bulk-buy and equitably distribute vaccines around the world. They are watching with dismay as some wealthier countries have decided to go it alone, striking deals with drugmakers to secure millions of doses of promising candidates for their citizens.
The deals – including those agreed by the United States, Britain and the European Union with the likes of Pfizer (PFE.N), BioNtech (22UAy.F), AstraZeneca (AZN.L) and Moderna (MRNA.O) – are undermining the global drive, experts say.The concern is that vaccine supply and allocation in this pandemic will echo the last – caused by the H1N1 flu virus in 2009/2010 – when rich nations bought up the available supply of vaccines, initially leaving poor countries with none. Click here to read the full report.
A pregnant woman tested positive for COVID-19, had to deliver her baby in an ambulance when she was being transferred from a district hospital in Tripura’s Kumarghat area to the apex state referral hospital in Agartala, which is 130 km away.
Laxmi Rani Chowdhury, 25, was taken to a district hospital at Kailashahar in Unakoti district on the morning of July 28, Tuesday. She underwent a mandatory rapid antigen test on arrival, where she tested positive for COVID-19. The hospital authorities referred her to Govind Ballabh Panth (GBP) Hospital in Agartala immediately on grounds of infrastructure shortage.
The ambulance carrying her also dropped another COVID-19 patient to Kumarghat Hospital, which was 30 km from the district hospital. Once there, Laxmi developed pain and her relatives sought help from the hospital authorities, who kept her under observation for an hour. Since the patient did not go into labour, she was again referred to Agartala. Click here to read our report.
After a few staff members at Nagaland CM Neiphiu Rio’s residential complex in Kohima tested positive for the novel coronavirus, the residential office has been closed for 48 hours. However, the normal functioning of the CMO continues, with all guidelines in place. “Few persons in the Chief Minister’s Residential Complex have tested positive for COVID-19. All SOPs are being implemented. The complex is being sanitized and the residential office closed for 48hrs” said a tweet from the Chief Minister’s official handle. Nagaland currently has 961 active Covid-19 cases. Its two main centres, Dimapur and capital Kohima are currently under lockdown.
Few persons in the Chief Minister’s Residential Complex have tested positive for COVID-19. All SOPs are being implemented. The complex is being sanitized and the residential office closed for 48hrs. The normal functioning of the CMO is continuing following all guidelines.
"Over 1,81,90,000 tests have been conducted in the country including RT-PCR and rapid antigen tests. There has been a week on week increase in average tests per day. India is conducting 324 tests per 10 lakhs population per day," R Bhushan, Secretary, Ministry of Health said.

Union Health Ministry on Thursday said that herd immunity in a country of the size and population of India can’t be a strategic option. “It can only be achieved through immunisation. Health Ministry thinks it’s possible in the future but for now, we have to follow COVID appropriate behaviour,” R Bhushan, Secretary, Ministry of Health was quoted as saying by ANI.
Food insecurity for US households last week reached its highest reported level since the Census Bureau started tracking the data in May, with almost 30 million Americans reporting that they’d not had enough to eat at some point in the seven days through July 21. In the bureau’s weekly Household Pulse Survey, roughly 23.9 million of 249 million respondents indicated they had “sometimes not enough to eat” for the week ended July 21, while about 5.42 million indicated they had “often not enough to eat.” The survey, which began with the week ended May 5, was published Wednesday.
The number of respondents who sometimes had insufficient food was at its highest point in the survey’s 12 weeks. The number who often experienced food insufficiency was at its highest since the week ended May 26.
This follows deep recession resulting from the pandemic, which put millions of Americans out of work. Unemployed Americans have been receiving an extra $600 per week benefit, which is set to expire at the end of July as Congress debates a new relief package.
India is currently conducting around five lakh COVID-19 tests every day and the plan is to double the number in the next one-two months, Union Science and Technology Minister Harsh Vardhan said on Thursday.
During the launch of a compendium on ‘Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) Technologies for COVID-19 Mitigation’, Vardhan, who is also the Union health minister, said that the country’s recovery rate of over 64 per cent is the best in the world while the fatality rate is nearly 2.2 per cent, news agency PTI reported.
"In April, we used to conduct 6,000 tests daily. Today, we are conducting over five lakh tests every day. Our plan is to take it to 10 lakh tests daily in 1-2 months and we are working towards it," Vardhan said.
Vietnam has had one of the world’s best records in containing the coronavirus despite bordering China, its biggest trading partner, where the virus was first reported.
But after more than three months with no reports of local transmission, new cases have now been reported in six cities and provinces in the past week and authorities in the communist-ruled country are scrambling to contain the new outbreak. Click here to read our explainer.
 Health workers at a health camp in Mumbai
Maharashtra continues to remain the worst-affected state.The COVID-19 tally in the state rose to 3,91,440 on Tuesday with addition of 7,717 new cases while the death toll mounted by 282, including 121 fatalities in Mumbai region, to 14,165.
A sero-survey conducted by the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation on 6,936 people from three wards found that 57 per cent respondents in slums had been exposed to and developed antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 virus, as opposed to 16 per cent in residential societies.
Those who were associated with the survey said that shared facilities like toilets, high population density and lack of physical distancing may be the reasons why those living in slums were 3.5 times more exposed to the virus than people living in housing societies.
Overall, the survey found that 40 per cent had had the infection. A surprise finding is that more women had been infected than men.
None of the nearly 7,000 people tested had taken a RT-PCR test for Covid-19, which means either they were aysmptomatically infected, or they may not have had serious enough symptoms to suspect they had caught the infection.
Covid-19 vaccine tracker: India at the centre of vaccine and Moderna’s phase III trials
