India Coronavirus Updates, June 13: Amit Shah to hold meeting with Delhi LG, CM Kejriwal tomorrow to review situation
Coronavirus India updates: Union Home Minister Amit Shah and Health Minister Harsh Vardhan will hold a meeting on Sunday with Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal and Lieutenant Governor Anil Baijal to review Covid-19 situation in the national capital. Delhi continues to witness an upward trend in the number of cases, recording over 2,000 fresh infections in a single day for the first time on Friday.
Nationally, the number of cases surpassed the 3 lakh mark Saturday after recording 11,458 fresh infections in the last 24 hours. A spike of 1 lakh cases was recorded in the last 10 days. According to John Hopkins University, India took the longest to cross the 3 lakh threshold out of the four worst-affected nations. With 386 new deaths in the last 24 hours the death toll in India stands at 8,884, the Union Health Ministry said.
Despite the increasing cases, the doubling time of Covid-19 infections has improved to 17.4 days from 15.4 days, the Ministry of Health said in a statement. Around 49.9 per cent patients have recovered so far. A total of 1,47,194 individuals have recovered while 1,41,842 individuals are under active medical supervision, it added.
Follow coronavirus LIVE updates
Although Maharashtra, which continues to remain the worst affected state, crossed the 1 lakh mark  a sharp rise in infections has been seen from those parts of the country that were previously unaffected by the pandemic. The new cases in Ladakh and Sikkim are some examples of this emerging trend.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi will interact with state chief ministers on June 16 and 17 with the second day of the video-conferencing set aside for CMs from states which are seeing a spurt in cases and death numbers such as Maharashtra, Delhi, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat.
Here are the top developments of the day:
Kerala has decided to allow some exemptions in its complete clampdown on Sundays, in view of the relaxations been provided since Monday. The exemptions will apply only in non-containment zones. With places of worship reopening partly since June 9, devotees moving to or back from such places are exempt from the Sunday shutdown.
With cases rising fast, Haryana is now on the verge of figuring among India’s worst coronavirus affected states. Considering the pace at which the coronavirus cases have begun to rise in Haryana, especially in border districts of National Capital Territory of Delhi, Haryana will soon be overtaking Bihar among the worst hit states of the country. Gurgaon crossed 3000 cases of Coronavirus today, with 203 more people testing positive. The district has so far recorded 3125 cases of Coronavirus, of who 1161 people have recovered and 25 have succumbed. District Magistrate today issued fresh list of containment zones, putting a total of 98 areas in the district this category – 94 in Gurgaon, 2 in Pataudi, and 1 each in Sohna and Farrukhnagar. Gurgaon crossed 3000 cases of Coronavirus today, with 203 more people testing positive. 6 more have also succumbed to the infection.
Data from Johns Hopkins University reveals that India has taken the longest to surpass 3 lakh caseload among the top four worst-affected nations. India is the fourth worst-hit nation by the Covid-19 pandemic after the US, Brazil and Russia.
India has taken 134 days to reach 3 lakh cases ever since the first infection was reported on January 30. This is in comparison to the US that was the fastest to reach the 3 lakh figure in 73 days, while Brazil and Russia to 85 and 109 days respectively.
Epidemiologists, both within the government and outside, say the crucial metric that helps decipher both the course of the pandemic as well as the success of the government in tackling Covid-19 is the death toll. Therefore, it is the death toll that should be the point of focus right now. At 2.86 per cent, India’s death rate from Covid is far lower than the international experience.
Areas previously unaffected by the coronavirus pandemic are reporting rapid rise in the infections in the country as India reached many milestones on Friday.
Ladakh and Sikkim, both regions with very small caseloads till now, are reporting unusually high numbers for their regions. Ladakh reported 104 new cases on Friday, while Sikkim reported 50. Ladakh had 135 confirmed infections before Friday, while Sikkim, the last state in India to have been affected by the virus, had just 13.
Calling it a “significant spread”, the Cabinet secretary noted that almost 80 per cent of the districts from North-East and eastern states reported their first coronavirus case in the last 3 weeks.
Out of the 98 districts reporting their first infection over 50% hail from the north-east — seven of them, barring Assam. One-fourth of these districts (25) were in four eastern states: Chhattisgarh (9), Odisha (7), Jharkhand (5) and West Bengal (4).
The Maharashtra government has approved the use of homeopathy medicine “Arsenic Album 30” for the general population as a prophylactic and an immunity booster against the disease.
Apart from this, the state government has also set up a task force and has come up with a list of Unani and Ayurvedic medicines like Agastya Haritaki, Ayush 64 as well as sesame oil, as measures against Covid-19.
The Ayush Ministry announced on Wednesday that it is going to begin a clinical trial to measure Arsenic Album 30’s efficacy against Covid-19 in six cities of the country.

