India lockdown diary, Day 29: UP police station turns marriage venue, Andhra MLA gets flak for ‘flower welcome’; and more
As India entered 29th day of the lockdown, the number of Covid-19 cases in the country crossed the 20,000 mark and the death toll increased to 652. The Centre, earlier in the day, said it will not tolerate the attacks on the healthcare workers in the country and announced its decision to bring an ordinance to make it a punishable offence.
Javadekar said the government will amend the Epidemics Diseases Act, 1897 to make the attacks on healthcare workers a cognisable and non-bailable offence, under which a guilty can be sentenced to up to seven years of imprisonment along with a fine of Rs 5 lakh. The cabinet decision came hours after Home Minister Amit Shah held a video-conference meet with doctors and assured them of their safety.
On the global front, the novel coronavirus has so far infected at least 2,553,853 and killed over 1,76,000 people.
Here is a curated list of some striking stories from across the country on Day 29
Violating guidelines of nationwide lockdown, a lawmaker in Andhra Pradesh was seen attending an inauguration ceremony of a borewell with scores of people showering flower petals at her feet. A video of the incident showed women and children lined up on either side of the road to welcome YSRCP MLA RK Roja. The Puttu legislator was criticised by the Opposition TDP as it went viral on social media.
“I did not expect such a grand welcome. However, I accepted their gesture as I did not wish to hurt their sentiments. Each person involved during the program maintained social distancing and wore masks. The TDP leaders are unnecessarily making it an issue.”, the actress-turned-legislator said in her defence.
A couple in UP’s Chandauli district will always remember how they began their married lives—walking out of a police station in the midst of a nationwide lockdown against a virus. As a return favour to Anil, who had helped the police in during a boat tragedy in February, police had allowed his marriage to take place in the temple inside the police station compound.
“Anil’s marriage with Jyoti was already fixed for April 20. However, the imposition of the nationwide lockdown and its subsequent extension worried him. He then contacted us and sought a solution,” SHO Rajesh Kumar told PTI. He had assured police that only five people from each side will take part in the ceremony.
Senior police officials including the additional superintendent of police, circle officer and in-charge of a police outpost were present during the marriage.
A woman dentist in Bengaluru is earning plaudits for reviving the newborn of a migrant labourer, who delivered the child outside the former’s clinic after failing to find a hospital despite a 7-km walk. Though the incident occurred on April 14 morning, it came to light recently after social media users showered praises on Dr Ramya Himanish, who runs a dental clinic in Dodda Bommasandra area in the city.
The migrant labourer, Shanti, had delivered the child on the pavement next to Himanish’s clinic, which had not opened by then. When the child did not respond, the woman’s husband assumed it had died and wrapped it with a newspaper. When Himanish noticed the woman lying on the kerb bleeding, she immediately took her and the baby inside the clinic. “When I went there, I saw the woman bleeding. I brought her inside and provided treatment. Then I checked the baby. After the resuscitation process, the child came to life,” Dr Himanish told PTI. Subsequently, Himanish arranged for an ambulance and sent the woman and the newborn to a government hospital for further treatment.
These unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have become a vital tool for authorities in enforcing the lockdown to check the spread of the disease, especially in hotspots where multiple cases have been detected. “We are using scores of high-tech drones to keep vigil and electronic surveillance in most of the red zones across the union territory,” a senior police officer told PTI here.
They are being regularly used in Srinagar, Jammu, Baramulla, Kupwara, Pulwama, Shopian, Badgam, Rajouri, Udhampur and Kathua districts besides over the highways during the past fortnight.
In a heartwarming gesture, the Mangaluru City Police arranged a convoy honour ceremony to salute healthcare professionals and other frontlines ‘Corona Warriors’ working towards containing the novel coronavirus pandemic in the city on Wednesday. According to Mangaluru City Police Commissioner P S Harsha, the event was carried out to instill a sense of confidence among all as they lead the state’s combat against the pandemic.
“Lately, we have been observing several negative incidents taking place against our frontline corona warriors including reports of accredited social health activist (ASHA) workers being targeted and doctors facing trouble to move around, among others. Joining hands with the entire district administration, this grand honour convoy was arranged to appreciate their tireless efforts and to motivate and boost their morale further,” Harsha told Indianexpress.com.
Don’t miss these articles on Coronavirus from the Explained section:
‣ How coronavirus attacks, step by step
‣ Mask or no mask? Why the guidance has been shifting
‣ Besides a face cover, should I wear gloves when I go outdoors?
‣ How the Agra, Bhilwara and Pathanamthitta Covid-19 containment models differ
‣ Can coronavirus damage your brain?

