Coronavirus India updates, June 15: ICMR recommends use of rapid antigen kits for testing in containment zones
India Coronavirus (Covid-19) Cases: With over 11,500 fresh cases reported in the last 24 hours, Covid-19 infections in India on Monday rose to 3.32 lakh, with the death toll approaching the 10,000 mark. As per the latest Health Ministry, the toll stood at 9520, with the recoveries more than the active cases.  While nearly 1.7 lakh people have recovered, there are over 1.5 lakh active infections in the country.
The Indian Railways on Monday said it had ferried 60 lakh migrant workers home since May 1 through Shramik Special trains but managed to recover only 15 per cent of operational cost. Railway Board Chairman VK Yadav said the average fare per person on Shramik Special trains was Rs 600 and the national transporter had run 4,450 Shramik trains so far. The Railways generated a revenue of around Rs 360 crore.
Maharashtra, the worst-affected state, has over 1 lakh cases, followed by Tamil Nadu and Delhi. India is the fourth country worst-hit by coronavirus, after the United States, Brazil, and Russia. Meanwhile, Home Minister Amit Shah on Monday met leaders from all political parties in Delhi to discuss the Covid-19 situation in the national capital a day after he held talks with Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal.
Here are the top developments in India today:
In view of the increasing numbers of cases among the returnees from Chennai and Delhi, the Karnataka Government on Monday revised its policy of quarantining interstate travellers by imposing a three-day institutional quarantine for those coming in from those two states followed by 11 days of home isolation.
Karnataka Chief Minister B S Yediyurappa announced the decision after a meeting on Covid-19 with ministers and officials. The state had earlier announced a seven-day institutional quarantine for those returning from Maharashtra. However, there was no mandatory institutional quarantine for asymptomatic people returning to Karnataka from other states.
Speaking to reporters after the meeting, Yediyurappa said, “Those coming from Maharashtra are subjected to seven days of institutional quarantine followed by seven days of home quarantine, while those coming from Chennai and Delhi will have to go for three days of institutional quarantine and eleven days of home quarantine. This decision is taken after spurt in the number of cases in these states.”
Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami Monday announced complete lockdown in four districts – Chennai, Chengalpet, Kancheepuram and Thiruvallur – from June 19 to June 30 following a surge in Covid-19 cases.
The decision was taken by the Tamil Nadu Chief Minister after he chaired a review meeting with the expert committee of health professionals constituted by the government as well as with the Tamil Nadu Health department officials and other ministers.
In Chennai, all areas under the limits of Greater Chennai Corporation will be under lockdown. The CM also announced Rs 1,000 cash support to all ration cardholders in these lockdown areas.
As workplaces are readying to begin operations after the coronavirus lockdown, an online self-assessment tool developed at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc.) could come in handy for many.
Named ‘COVID-19 Workplace Readiness Indicator,’ the tool has been developed by a team of IISC researchers in collaboration with the Karnataka State Disaster Management Authority (KSDMA).
“The tool not only scores an organisation’s readiness but also provides some targeted suggestions if specific weaknesses are identified,” Nihesh Rathod, a Cisco-IISc. PhD scholar at the Department of Electrical Communication Engineering, who helped develop the tool, said.
The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has recommended the use of rapid antigen test kits for diagnosis of COVID-19 in containment zones and healthcare settings in combination with the RT-PCR test. The kits will allow faster diagnosis without laboratory examination.
Kerala has issued orders allowing people to travel to the state for short visits without going into mandatory quarantine subject to a set of conditions prescribed by the government. The order, part of the relaxations in the lockdown restrictions, will apply to people travelling to the state for purposes including official, business, medical, court cases, property management etc.
“Since placing them in home/institutional quarantine is not feasible, Government have allowed them to visit the State for a period up to 7 days without mandatory quarantine, after obtaining entry passes through covid19jagratha portal. The students who visit the State for attending exams or academic-related purposes can stay for a period of 3 days before the start of exam and 3 days after the exam is over,” the order by principal secretary KR Jyothilal read.
Chennai and adjoining areas will be under lockdown from June 19 to 30 sans present relaxations and a full scale shutdown on two Sundays, Chief Minister K Palaniswami said on Monday.
After a meeting with an expert panel and amid rising coronavirus cases here, Palaniswami said the lockdown will be applicable in Chennai and several areas that fall under the jurisdiction of Greater Chennai Police and situated in Tiruvallur, Chengelpet and Kancheepuram districts. During the 12 day period, only essential services will be allowed with restrictions, he said.
Five women have tested positive for COVID-19 in Mizoram, raising the state’s tally to 117, a Health Department official said on Monday. All new patients, who had recently returned to the state from Delhi, are from Mamit district, he said. “A total of 682 samples were tested at Zoram Medical College (ZMC) on Sunday and five of them were found positive,” the official said. (PTI)
In a relief to both domestic and international airlines, the Bombay High Court on Monday allowed them to fill up middle seats, in compliance with the May 31 circular issued by the Civil Aviation, on the condition that passengers wear ‘wrap around’ gowns and that standard operating procedures (SOPs) issued by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) are followed.
A division bench of Justices S J Kathawalla and S P Tavade today passed the judgement, through video-conference, on a plea filed by Air India pilot Deven Kanani, who alleged that national carrier Air India had violated social distancing norms while evacuating Indians stranded abroad on special flights. The plea was submitted through advocate Abhilash Panickar.
On June 4, the bench had reserved the matter for final order. In its interim order, the court had directed all domestic and international airlines to comply with the DGCA rules till its final hearing.
Amid the surge in COVID cases in Delhi, Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal today said that the government has no plans to impose lockdown in the capital. Taking to Twitter, Kejriwal wrote, “Many people are speculating whether another lockdown in Delhi in being planned. There are no such plans.”
Many people are speculating whether another lockdown in Delhi in being planned. There are no such plans.
— Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) June 15, 2020
With over 41,000 cases, Delhi has the third highest cases in the country.
An all-party meeting was chaired by Home Minister Amit Shah this morning. Shah apprised the leaders of BJP, Congress, Aam Aadmi Party and the BSP on the steps taken to check the coronavirus pandemic and sought their views on the issue, a Home Ministry official said.
Gujarat Chief Minister Vijay Rupani on Monday said his government does not plan to impose lockdown again in the state. Dismissing speculations on social media platforms about the lockdown, the chief minister urged people not to get carried away by such “unfounded rumours”.
“Following the unlock from June 1, daily life is gradually becoming normal. Business and trade-related activities have also picked up in the state. In such a scenario, the state government does not have any plans to impose the lockdown again,” Rupani said in a statement.
The number of COVID-19 cases in Maharashtra’s Nashik district has gone up to 1,985 as 12 more people have tested positive for the disease, the district administration said on Monday. All the new patients are from Malegaon town, it said.
Their reports came out positive late Sunday night, the district administration said in a release. Out of the total coronavirus cases so far, 887 have been reported from Malegaon, 673 from Nashik city and 353 from other parts of the district. Besides, 72 patients from outside the district are also undergoing treatment in hospitals here, it said.
The COVID-19 tally climbed by over 10,000 and breached the 40,000 mark in just six days in Delhi with an average of over 1,600 new cases on a daily basis, a sharp spike from the 79 days it took to reach the 10,000 mark, according to an analysis. It took eight days for the number of cases to rise from 20,000 to 30,000 in Delhi, while it took 13 days for the tally to progress from 10,000 to 20,000.
According to the analysis of the Delhi government data, the number of cases crossed the 30,000 mark on June 9 and it crossed the 40,000 mark on June 14. Delhi recorded 2,224 fresh coronavirus cases on Sunday in the highest single-day spike, taking the tally to over 41,000, while the death toll due to the pandemic mounted to 1,327.
The Railways on Monday resumed suburban train services in Mumbai for ferrying people engaged in essential services. The Central Railway and Western Railway decided to run “selective suburban services” over main line and harbour line only for essential staff as defined by the state government, a senior official said.
“It has been decided to run selected suburban services over mainline and harbour lines w.e.f.15th June, 2020 with defined protocol & SOP, ONLY for movement,” the CR and WR tweeted. “ESSENTIAL STAFF AS IDENTIFIED by the STATE GOVERNMENT who are traveling by selected suburban trains are requested to travel with VALID TICKETS to avoid inconvenience,” they tweeted.
Since the third week of May, the growth of novel coronavirus infections in Gujarat has been crawling at less than 3 per cent — on Saturday, it was 2.35 per cent, the slowest in the country, along with Chandigarh, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, and Madhya Pradesh.
In Rajasthan, the growth rate of the infection is now 2.66 per cent, and in Madhya Pradesh, just 2.06 per cent. In Gujarat, the number of daily new cases fell outside the range on only five days in May. In June, daily case numbers in the state have found a new bracket — between 400 and 500 — and only on four days this month has the number of cases fallen outside this range.
In Madhya Pradesh, the number of daily new cases has remained within the 150-250 range on all but five days since May 10. And Madhya Pradesh has reported between five and 10 deaths on 20 out of the 30 days since May 13.

