Centre panel wants Delhi private hospital rates cut by two-third
A high-level committee constituted by the Union Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has recommended reducing the cost of Covid-19 treatment in private hospitals in Delhi by two-thirds of existing rates.
According to the committee led by NITI Aayog member Dr V K Paul, the recommended rate to be charged for an isolation bed is in the range of Rs 8,000-10,000 a day from the existing Rs 24,000-25,000 a day. Likewise, for an ICU bed without ventilator, the rate has been recommended to be reduced from Rs 34,000-43,000 a day to Rs 13,000-15,000 a day. For an ICU bed with ventilator, which costs Rs 44,000-54,000 a bed a day now, the recommended charge is down to Rs 15,000-18,000 a day.
The committee has also said these rates will be inclusive of PPE costs. As of now, hospitals have been charging for PPE kits separately.
Sources said the committee’s report has been forwarded to the Delhi government for further action. The Delhi government is likely to take private hospitals into confidence before issuing an order.
The recommendations follow a Sunday meeting that Home Minister Amit Shah held with Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal and Lieutenant Governor Anil Baijal on the Covid situation in Delhi. During the meeting, it was decided that rates for both testing and treatment would be reduced based on recommendations of the V K Paul Committee.
The Delhi government has already reduced testing rates to Rs 2,400 from the earlier Rs 4,500 based on the recommendations of the same committee. It has also started rapid antigen tests that cost just Rs 450 and give a result within half an hour.
With Home Minister Amit Shah holding a meeting with chief secretaries of Delhi, Haryana and UP, where he pushed for a unified strategy for Covid-19 containment and treatment in the Delhi-NCR region, authorities in Noida, Ghaziabad, Gurgaon and Faridabad are also likely to be nudged to follow the new treatment rates.
The MHA has already asked them to work towards implementing the testing rates earlier fixed by the Centre for Delhi.
“To provide relief to the common man in Delhi, Home Minister Amit Shah constituted a committee under Member of NITI Aayog to fix rates charged by private hospitals in Delhi for isolation beds, ICUs without ventilator support & ICUs with ventilator support,” the MHA said in a statement.
According to MHA, progress has already been made in the rapid antigen tests started by the Delhi government following approval from ICMR. It said that as on today, 7,040 people have been tested in 193 testing centres. Testing will continue with increased numbers in coming days, it added.
The issue of alleged overcharging by private hospitals had been raised by several patients as well as the Delhi government in the past, with Delhi Chief Minister Kejriwal warning hospitals of stern action. Now, given that the latest move to cut costs has the backing of the Union Home Minister, it is unlikely that hospitals will breach the price cap by much.
It also said that as many as 2.3 lakh people have been surveyed for Covid-19 symptoms in Delhi’s 242 containment zones.
MoS Home G Kishan Reddy, who had surveyed testing centres on Thursday, had said the government had plans to test six lakh people through the rapid antigen testing methodology and the capacity could be increased further if needed. He said the government had distributed 50,000 kits for the purpose.
The issue of alleged overcharging by private hospitals had been raised by several patients as well as the Delhi government in the past, with Kejriwal warning hospitals of stern action.
Private hospitals claim the charges suggested by the committee are not in line with suggestions made by them to the experts. Even after the caps are enforced, hospitals can still charge more, for example, by increasing the fee charged by medical professionals, diagnostic costs, and expenses for laboratory services. But given that the order has the backing of the Home Minister, it is unlikely that hospitals will breach the price cap by much.
“We are waiting for a detailed order after which we will revise the packages,” said the representative of a prominent private hospital.
Sources said the committee’s report has been forwarded to the Delhi government for further action. The Delhi government is likely to take private hospitals into confidence before issuing an order.
The recommendations follow a Sunday meeting that Home Minister Amit Shah held with Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal and Lieutenant Governor Anil Baijal on the COVID situation in Delhi. During the meeting, it was decided that rates for both testing and treatment would be reduced based on recommendations of the VK Paul Committee.
The Delhi government has already reduced testing rates to Rs 2,400 from the earlier Rs 4,500 based on the recommendations of the same committee. It is also pushing for Rapid Antigen tests that cost just Rs 450 and give a result within half an hour.
📣 The Indian Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel (@indianexpress) and stay updated with the latest headlines
