Coronavirus June 9 Highlights: Over 2,500 fresh cases in Maharashtra; Tripura reports first covid-19 death
India is better positioned in the fight against COVID-19 compared to other nations but there is no space for complacency, Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan said on Tuesday, even as a record rise in coronavirus cases for the sixth consecutive day in the country pushed the tally to over 2.6 lakh. A total of 266 new COVID-19 fatalities and 9,987 cases were reported in the last 24 hours.  The death toll due to the coronavirus infection rose to 7,466 and the cases mounted to 2,66,598 in the country.  With India relaxing restrictions, a surge in cases is expected to begin soon. Several states like Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir, Assam, Haryana, Karnataka, Chhattisgarh and Tripura have been showing a spurt in cases.
In other news, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal tested negative for covid-19, a day after he showed symptoms of the infection. Meanwhile, Delhi Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia asserted that the number of COVID-19 cases in Delhi will explode to 5.5 lakhs by the end of July even though the Centre said there is no community transmission of the virus in the capital.
An Expert Explains: The best practices for home quarantine of Covid-19 patients

The Supreme Court, on the other hand, asked worst Covid-19 affected state Maharashtra to make concerted effort in sending the migrant workers still stranded there to their native places. The top court, which directed all states and Union Territories to transport all stranded workers by train, bus or other mode within 15 days, said there were “huge lapses” by the Maharashtra authorities in dealing with the issue.
Globally, the number of people infected with coronavirus rose to 7,119,736 with as many as 406,542 fatalities.

The Manipur police booked four inmates of a quarantine center situated in Churachandpur and Pherzawl districts for creating ‘nuisance and violating’ the protocols to be followed inside center.
The incident comes close on the heels of the warning issued by Manipur Chief Minister that inmate who violates safety protocols and mischievous in a quarantine center will be jailed.
The inmates were booked under U/S 51 Disaster Management Act, 188/269/34 IPC, based on a written complaint on Monday at Churachandpur police station, police said.
The four inmates and some other unknown persons are presently quarantined at Pherzawl District transit quarantine centre ‘En Gedi Centre’, Geljang, Churachandpur.
Police said that the inmates had returned from Delhi and were booked for creating nuisance at the quarantine center on Sunday and for violating SOPs of the center. Moreover, the inmates disobeyed the lawful order of the deputed staffs of the center. The inmates used abusive words and threatening gesture against the police personnel deployed at the said center, the police said. 
Jimmy Leivon reports from Imphal
To rein in truant suspected coronavirus cases put under home quarantine, who violate guidelines and venture outside, the Punjab government is ready with a plan to put "lockable" Global Positioning System (GPS) bands on their wrists.
According to sources, a tender in this regard is ready and is likely to be floated by the state Health Department very soon to procure at least 1,000 such bands in first phase. Read more here
AN officer of Assistant Commissioner of Police (ACP) rank from Pune City Police has tested positive for Covid-19. Till now, 62 Covid-19 cases have been reported in Pune City Police, of which 23 are still active.
The ACP-rank officer was isolated and tested after he came down with fever. His immediate contacts were also quarantined and tested. Read more here
Ninety days after the first coronavirus positive patient was found in Mumbai, the number of cases in the country’s financial capital crossed 50,000 on Tuesday while the death toll reached 1,758.
The number of coronavirus cases in Mumbai had crossed 10,000 on May 6 and 25,000 on May 21. The Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) said in a release that 1,015 new coronavirus patients were detected on Tuesday, taking the tally of cases to 50,878.
Earlier meant to open on June 14, religious places in Meghalaya will not open till the end of the month. A release from Chief Secretary MS Rao said that the order dated June 6, permitting religious places/places of worship to open with effect from June 14, is now “kept in abeyance until further orders.”
Chief Minister Conrad Sangma said in a video statement that the decision was made after a meeting with leaders from different religious organisations. “After getting everybody’s comments and suggestions, majority of the church leaders, the temples and the mosques and other religious organisations, most of them felt we should postpone or revisit this decision of opening places of worship on the 14th,” said CM Sangma, adding that health was a priority and a number of stranded people were still coming back to the state. “We will not open till end of month. Towards the end of the month, we will consult everybody and then decide,” he said.
The state has 29 active cases — out of which four were detected on Tuesday.
The rise in cases comes at a time when the country has stepped out of a 75-day coronavirus lockdown with malls, religious places and offices opening in several parts of the country under strict conditions. Since the onset of June, the country has also been witnessing over 200 COVID-19 fatalities each day. Also, the country has registered over 9,000 coronavirus infection cases for the sixth day in a row.

Maharshtra
The state reported 2259 new cases and 120 deaths of which 58 deaths & 1015 positive patients are from Mumbai. Total number of cases now at 90787, including 42638 recovered, 44849 active cases, & 3289 deaths.
Gujarat
In last 24 hours, 470 fresh casesand 33 deaths reported in Gujarat. The total number of positive cases rose to 21,044 including 14,373 cured/discharged and 1313 deaths.
West Bengal
372 fresh cases reported taking tally to 8985, including 4950 active cases, 3620 discharged and 415 deaths.
A day after Delhi Lieutenant Governor Anil Baijal put down the AAP government’s decision on reservation of hospital beds, he today said that Delhi government's goal should be plan for adequate infra rather than discrimination among patients on the grounds of residence.
Discrimination among patients on grounds of residence unfortunate. The goal of the govt should be to plan for adequate infra. Delhi belongs to all: L-G, responding to Delhi govt's criticism on him striking down decision on reservation of hospital beds. @IndianExpress
46 new patients tested positive with COVID-19 in Mizoram on Tuesday. This has been the highest number of COVID cases found in a single day in the state even as the state government imposed a total lockdown for two weeks since last midnight to arrest spread of the virus.
With these new cases, Mizoram now has 88 COVID-19 cases, out of which 87 cases are active. The Department of Information and Public Relations informed this afternoon that 29 samples were tested positive at Zoram Medical College (AMC) laboratory. They include sixteen males and thirteen females. 28 of them are from Lunglei District while one is from Lawngtlai district. All the patient are between ages 18 to 28. (Input from Debraj Deb)
Tripura reported its first COVID-19 death on Tuesday after a 42 year old patient admitted in the COVID care ward of state-run GB Panth Hospital passed away this afternoon.The patient from Chachu Bazaar area of West Tripura district was admitted at the hospital after he suffered a cardiac arrest earlier in May. He was later tested for coronavirus and his report came positive on June 03. He was shifted to the COVID care ward of flu ward on the day.
After being treated there for six days, Debbarma passed away at 3 PM this afternoon at GBP Hospital’s COVID ward. In a Tweet this evening, Tripura Chief Minister Biplab Kumar Deb wrote, “Unfortunate to share that Mr. Biswa Kumar Debbarma, a COVID19 patient from West Tripura, is no more. Our Doctors gave their best but failed to save his precious life. On 1st May, he suffered a stroke (CVA) and was a patient of hypertension”.
As temples reopened for devotees in Kerala on Tuesday after over 75 days, a Union Minister and a state minister sparred over the decision with the former dubbing it as 'hasty'.
While Minister of State for External Affairs V Muraleedharan questioned "the haste shown" in reopening the temples, state Devaswom Minister Kadakampally Surendran said the decision was only in line with the Centre's guidelines in allowing places of worship to permit entry of devotees.
Unveiling graded exit plan from the COVID-19 lockdown 'Unlock 1.0', the central government has earlier allowed reopening of places of worship for devotees, malls and restaurants from Monday onwards across the country after they remained out of bounds since March 25.
Muraleedharan, a senior BJP leader from Kerala, in a Facebook post on Monday hit out at the Left front government saying, "your government is unable to even maintain social distancing in the state.
As the COVID-19 cases are increasing in the state, are you trying to put the blame on temples by opening them? We urge the government to withdraw the decision to open the temples under the Travancore Devaswom Board," he said.
Meghalaya on Tuesday withdrew order to reopen places of worship amid rise in covid cases. The state now has a total of 36 cases and 1 death.   
A day after Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal showed symtoms for coronavirus, he was tested negative today.
CM @ArvindKejriwal tests negative for Covid-19. Thank god!
Karnataka Health department confirmed first Covid-19 positive case in Chamarajanagar district, the only district to have stayed a green zone to date. The tally in state now is 5921 (161 new cases reported today). While 164 more people recovered from the infection in the last 24 hours, total discharges have risen to 2605. Deaths: 66. Active cases: 3248.
#Karnataka: Health department confirms first #COVID19 positive case in Chamarajanagar district, the only district to have stayed a green zone to date. The patient (P-5919) is a 22-yr-old male who returned recently from Maharashtra. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/MAny7Fspu4
The Lucknow Zoo on Tuesday was opened for public after two-months of lockodown. Express photo by Vishal Srivastav.


*India has reported 9,987 cases of coronavirus in the last 24 hours, taking the country’s tally to 2,66,598 infections.
*With India relaxing restrictions, a surge in cases is expected to begin soon. There has been a major virus surge in 24 states and UTs, cases are growing faster than national average.
*The Supreme Court has directed the Centre to send migrant labourers to their home states within 15 days.
*Delhi Health Minister Satyendar Jain said the source of the Covid-19 infection was unknown in 50 per cent cases in the national capital.
*At the same time, Delhi Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia said there was no community spread of the disease.
*Sisodia also said the government was expecting 5.5 lakh Covid-19 cases by July 31.
*The World Health Organization (WHO) Tuesday said the coronavirus pandemic was “worsening” across the world.
*The number of people infected with coronavirus rose to 7,119,736 on Tuesday, with as many as 406,542 fatalities.
*Brazil drew further criticism for its handling of the coronavirus pandemi after it published contradictory figures on fatalities and infections, deepening a scandal over the country’s COVID-19 data.
*The UK on Monday reported around 55 deaths, the lowest daily death toll since the time before the country went into lockdown on March 23. The country now has 288,834 cases of coronavirus and as many as 40,680 deaths.
The Supreme Court Tuesday asked worst Covid-19 affected state Maharashtra to be more vigilant and make concerted effort in identifying and sending the migrant workers still stranded there to their native places. The top court, which directed all states and Union Territories to transport all stranded workers by train, bus or other mode within 15 days, said there were "huge lapses" by the Maharashtra authorities in dealing with the issue and asked the government there to announce suitable place for their registration.
A bench of Justices Ashok Bhushan, Sanjay Kishan Kaul and M R Shah noted the state government's submission that it has 37,000 migrant workers waiting to return to their native places and it has requested only one train from the railways for sending them back. "We are of the view that State has to make a more vigilant and concentrated effort in identifying the migrant workers, who are still stranded in State of Maharashtra and who are willing to return to their native places," it said. It added that the government should publicise and announce the places like police stations or any other suitable place for identifying/registering the workers who have not yet been provided any train or bus journey.
Deputy Commissioner of Police (North) in Delhi Police Monika Bhardwaj, who had tested positive for coronavirus last month, joined office on Tuesday after recovering from the infection. She was welcomed back to work with garlands by her subordinates, who also clapped and showered flower petals on her.
I thank everyone for the prayers and good wishes. I have joined back today. Thankyou.



Two persons on Tuesday tested positive for coronavirus in the Union Territory of Daman, which was till now in green zone, officials said.
The two patients, a 41-year-old man and a four-year-old girl, both of whom arrived here from Mumbai recently, were shifted to a hospital in Marwad area of Daman, District Collector Rakesh Minhas said.
"Till now, the man was kept at a government-run quarantine facility, while the girl was home quarantined with her parents in Khariwad area. We have shifted both the patients to a hospital in Marwad," he said.
The girl's parents, whose reports came out negative, have also been shifted to the isolation ward of the hospital, the official said.
Delhi BJP chief has requested the LG to make new quarantine centres as cases in the city are on surge.
Discussed with LG to make new quarentine centres because there are several homes that are very small, oxygen cylinders need to be increased, call should be given asking voluntary health workers to join the COVID fight, said @adeshguptabjp after meeting @LtGovDelhi@IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/gWxxgN8UTT
 A priest cleans temple bells in Lucknow on Sunday. (Express photo/Vishal Srivastava)
Amid the surge in cases, India has opened the doors of public places like malls and places of religious significance today.  Besides coming up with their lists of dos and don’ts for the people, authorities have ensured that premises of religious places, restaurants and malls have been cleaned and provisions for adherence to social distancing and other protocols been made. Malls, hotels, and restaurants; places of worship; schools and colleges, all have been allowed to open in a phased manner over the next couple of months.
Shopping malls and places of worship across the country, barring states like Maharashtra and Goa, are ready to throw their doors open to people from Monday after remaining closed for nearly two-and-a-half months due to the lockdown prompted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
While entrances to religious places and malls must have hand sanitiser dispensers and thermal screening provisions, not more than 50 per cent of seating capacity is going to be permitted at food courts and restaurants, the guidelines say. Instead of dine-ins, the SOPs call for takeaways to be encouraged.
Moreover, the Union Culture Ministry has approved opening of 820 Archaeological Survey of India-protected monuments that have places of worship from Monday. The ministry has decided to open only those monuments among the over 3,000 ASI-maintained monuments where religious events take place, such as Nila Mosque at Hauz Khas enclave, the Qutub archaeological area and Lal Gumbad in Delhi.
With the search for a Covid-19 vaccine becoming nothing less than the holy grail for scientists, enormous attention and funding have been focused on developing and mass-producing an injection. The rapid spread of SARS-nCov-2 has led experts to declare that it would continue to spread if a vaccine cannot be found.
