India Coronavirus Cases Updates, June 27: Eight states contributed 85% virus caseload, 87% deaths, says Health Ministry
India Coronavirus Latest Update: India on Saturday registered another record high of 18,552 new cases, pushing the country’s tally above 5,00,000, the official Health Ministry data showed on Saturday. Deaths rose by 384 to 15,685.
Union Health Minister Dr Harsh Vardhan Saturday said India’s recovery rate was nearly 60 per cent, while the fatality rate was near 3 per cent. The doubling rate is now 19 days. “Our mortality/fatality rate is near 3 per cent which is very less. Our doubling rate has come down to near 19 days, which was three days before the lockdown,” he said. Of the total 5,08,953 Covid-19 cases, 2,95,881 people have recovered, so far.
The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) said a total of 79,96,707 samples have been tested so far, with 2,20,479 samples being tested on June 26. Follow India Coronavirus LIVE Updates
Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Saturday visited a newly created COVID-19 care facility with over 10,000 beds in the national capital and reviewed arrangements. He was accompanied by CM Arvind Kejriwal during the visit. “Visited the ‘Sardar Patel COVID Care Centre’ in Delhi to review its preparedness. I thank Radha Soami Satsang Beas and all others who helped to create this huge Covid care facility. This 10,000-bed centre would provide huge relief to the people of Delhi,” Shah tweeted after the visit.
The facility in the Chhatarpur area will have two wings — a COVID care centre where asymptomatic positive cases will be treated and a dedicated COVID healthcare centre. The Indo Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) has been given the responsibility for the management of the centre and act as the nodal agency.
While leaving the facility, the home minister told officials there: “Zarurat na pade iski bhagwan se prarthna hai (I pray to God that not many people need to use it).”
The Union Health Ministry Saturday said the total number of recoveries has fast outgrown the number of active COVID-19 cases, with the difference between the two nearing one lakh fast. The number of active cases stood at 1,97,387 while 2,95,880 patients have recovered, the ministry said, adding, “With this encouraging status, the recovery rate is touching 58.13 per cent amongst COVID-19 patients.” The recovered cases have exceeded the active cases by 98,493 as of Saturday.
As a testimony to the ramped-up testing facilities, India now has 1,026 diagnostic laboratories dedicated to COVID-19. This includes 741 in the government sector and 285 private laboratory, the ministry said.
With 127 fresh coronavirus cases reported on Saturday, the tally of Uttar Pradesh’s Gautam Buddh Nagar district rose to 2,072, including 21 deaths. In the last 24 hours, 97 patients were discharged, the UP Health Department data stated. The recovery rate of patients improved slightly to 54.62 per cent on Saturday from 53.39 per cent on Friday. It was 56.76 per cent on Thursday, 59.67 per cent on Wednesday and 60.25 per cent on Tuesday, according to the data. Gautam Buddh Nagar has the highest number of active cases (915) in Uttar Pradesh, followed by Ghaziabad (680), Lucknow (399), Kanpur Nagar (320), Hapur (279), Meerut (289) and Bulandshahr (185), the data stated.
Eight states including – Maharashtra, Delhi, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal – contributed 85.5 per cent of the active COVID-19 caseload and 87 per cent of the total deaths due to the disease in India, according to the Union Health Ministry. It told the GOM 15 central teams consisting of public health experts, epidemiologists and a senior joint secretary-level officer have been deployed to provide support to the states. Another central team is currently visiting Gujarat, Maharashtra and Telangana to strengthen ongoing efforts for management of COVID-19, it said.
A 41-year-old journalist working for a Tamil television channel in the news section died of COVID-19 at a hospital in Chennai on Saturday, the state government said. Condoling his death, Chief Minister K Palaniswami ordered a solatium of Rs 5 lakh to the bereaved family. Minister for Information, Kadambur Raju too said he would provide Rs 50,000 assistance. The deceased is was Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital and is survived by wife and 12-year-old son.
The video cameraman, E Velmurugan’s death was very unfortunate and saddening, Greater Chennai Corporation Commissioner G Prakash said. A journalist for about 20 years, he had worked for a couple of media outlets,the Chennai Press Club said in a statement. The press club sought Rs 50 lakh solatium for the bereaved family, a government job for the widow and an insurance plan for journalists.
Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Saturday stressed over the daily COVID-19 testing capacity in the state and said the target should now be to increase it to 25,000 each day, PTI quoted an official as saying. Currently, the state is conducting 20,000 tests daily. Additional Chief Secretary Awanish Awasthi said the CM directed officials to give special attention to the state’s western districts, especially the Meerut division, the chief minister stressed on giving momentum to surveillance works and awareness drive.
He further directed that rapid antigen test should be started in Meerut, Ghaziabad and Noida so that coronavirus cases can be promptly detected. He also directed medical, revenue and police departments to make preparations for a special programme in Meerut division from July 1 to 7, under which door-to-door medical screening would be undertaken.
Puducherry Chief Minister V Narayanasamy announced his office would be closed for the next two days as one of his staff members tested positive for COVID-19. The CM told reporters via video that the person was among the 87 people who were identified as COVID-19 positive at the end of testing of samples during the last 24 hours. Narayanasamy said his office was sprayed with disinfectant to prevent the possible spread of the pandemic. He appealed to the people not to visit the Assembly, which houses his office, in view of a staff member being a COVID-19 patient.
The union territory so far has 619 cases with 10 deaths.
Following the footsteps of United Kingdom, India too has decided to add the inexpensive steroid dexamethasone in the treatment protocols for COVID-19 patients in moderate to severe stages of illness among other therapeutic measures, the Health Ministry said Saturday, PTI reported. The updated protocol includes the advice to use dexamethasone as an alternative choice to methylprednisolone. The revised treatment protocols for moderate cases advised considering methylprednisolone 0.5 to 1 mg/kg or dexamethasone 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg for three days, preferably within 48 hours of admission or if oxygen requirement is increasing and if inflammatory markers are increased.
According to the revised ‘Clinical Management Protocols for COVID-19’, dexamethasone which is already used in treating lung infections besides in a wide range of conditions for its anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant effects can be used as an alternative to methylprednisolone which already existed in the treatment guidelines. Few days ago, the ministry on June 13 allowed drug remdesivir for restricted emergency use and off-label application of tocilizumab, a drug that modifies the immune system or its functioning, and convalescent plasma for treating COVID-19 patients in moderate stage of the illness as an investigational therapy.
For more details, please see this Press Release:https://t.co/HGW4C6kHqv https://t.co/w0bdHjCHZU
— Ministry of Health (@MoHFW_INDIA) June 27, 2020
With 796 new coronavirus cases, Andhra Pradesh’s tally rose to 12,285 and 11 fresh deaths took the toll to 157, according to the health department bulletin. Anantapuramu district recorded 161 cases in a day, pushing it to the second spot in the state with a total of 1,320 behind Kurnool (1,684). Krishna and Kurnool districts registered four fresh coronavirus deaths each while West Godavari, East Godavari and Vizianagaram accounted for one each. It was the first COVID-19 death in Vizianagaram district to date. AP now has 6,648 active COVID-19 cases
Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal Saturday listed five “weapons” his government was using to combat the disease. The increase in number of beds, testing and isolation, distribution of pulse oxymetres, plasma therapy and surveys and screening were the five measures taken in the national capital. Speaking to the press, Kejriwal said the speed at which the number of Covid cases had risen in the city was faster than the government had expected. The city now has a total of 77,240 cases and 2,492 deaths.
दिल्ली वालों ने करोना के ख़िलाफ़ ज़बरदस्त युद्ध छेड़ा हुआ है। इस युद्ध में हमारे ये पाँच हथियार हैं https://t.co/CelqbDD6vA
— Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) June 27, 2020
In Maharashtra, 417 police personnel of Thane police commissionerate tested positive for coronavirus, PTI reported. Three of them, all constables, succumbed to the virus. Thane Police Commissioner Vivek Phansalkar urged personnel to remain “extra cautious” while performing their duties.
The number of daily deaths from Covid-19 in Maharashtra has been declining for over a fortnight now, government data analysed by The Indian Express show. This declining trend contrasts with the continuing rising trend in the number of daily new Covid cases, and could indicate the impact of several relatively recent policy interventions in the battle against the pandemic. Maharashtra carries India’s heaviest Covid case load and death toll, having reported close to 1.52 lakh cases and 7,106 deaths until Friday. The first case in the state was reported on March 9.
Tamil Nadu on Friday reported 3,645 new novel coronavirus cases, taking the state’s total to 74,622. A total of 1,956 cases were reported in Chennai, taking the city’s tally to 49,690. At least 46 deaths were reported over the last 24 hours, taking the total toll to 957. Of the deceased cases, 44 persons had comorbidities.
DMK MLA from Cheyyur R T Arasu has tested positive for COVID-19. He is the third legislator from the DMK after the late J Anbazhagan and Vasantham K Karthikeyan to contract the infection and the fifth MLA in Tamil Nadu. Read Tamil Nadu live news updates
Barely ten days after permitting 16 private diagnostic centers and hospitals in the state to conduct RT-PCR based testing of samples for coronavirus, the Telangana health department is preparing to take “stringent action” against several of them over several violations, ranging from poor quality control, poor hygiene, incorrect testing methods and failure to share full data with authorities.
The state has witnessed a sudden spike in the number of Covid-19 cases since June 16, taking the tally to 12,349 on June 26. Of these, 7,436 are active and under treatment. As many as 6,943 positive cases have emerged during the last 10 days after Telangana ramped up its testing.
After the state health department observed a disparity in the figures uploaded by private labs into the ICMR and state portals on June 24, an inspection was initiated by four teams, comprising senior microbiologists and senior officers from the health department across 16 private laboratories.
Odisha reported one more death due to Covid-19 on Saturday, taking the death toll to 18. As many as 170 people tested positive for the virus, bringing the state’s total tally to 6,350.
Out of the 170 new cases, 143 were reported from quarantine centres, where people returning from other states have been lodged for preliminary observation, while 27 were local people, an official said.
The number of active cases in the state stands at 1,903 and 4,402 people have recovered.
