Coronavirus India LIVE Updates: Complacency led to surge in Kerala, says CM Vijayan; Karti Chidambaram tests positive
Coronavirus India News Live Updates: With nearly 53,000 new cases (52,972), the number of confirmed infections in India crossed the 18-lakh mark on Monday. As many as 771 casualties took place in the last 24 hours, pushing the death toll to 38,135. Of the 18,03,696 cases, 5,79,357 are active, while 11,86,203 have been cured. Kerala, which has 25,911 cases, witnessed a surge due to complacency, Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan said.
Lok Sabha MP from Tamil Nadu Karti Chidambaram on Monday said he had tested positive for the disease and was in home quarantine. His announcement came a day after Union Home Minister Amit Shah, Karnataka Chief Minister B S Yediyurappa and Tamil Nadu Governor Banwarilal Purohit said they had all contracted the disease. Uttar Pradesh minister Kamal Rani Varun Sunday succumbed to the disease. Bollywood actor Amitabh Bachchan was discharged after he tested negative, while his son Abhishek is still undergoing treatment at a Mumbai hospital.
Global coronavirus cases surpassed 18 million as the pandemic is now adding a million infections every four days, prompting more lockdowns. The World Health Organisation, has meanwhile, said that the said it expects the Covid-19 pandemic to be of “lengthy duration” and that it remains “a public health emergency of international concern.”

About 2,300 people, who tested positive for COVID-19 in Lucknow, had given false information pertaining to their names, mobile numbers and addresses, news agency PTI reported on Monday. 
While 1,171 people out of those who gave false information have been tracked, a hunt is on for the others.
A senior health official said, "2,290 people who had undergone COVID-19 tests at various private and government laboratories between July 23 and July 31 had given false names, mobile numbers and addresses. This came to the fore when our department could not contact them. We have informed the police about it."
These people are not only from Lucknow but other cities also who were tested in the state capital, he said.
IT and Telecom Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad has gone into self-isolation, as he had met Home Minister Amit Shah on Saturday evening, a source said. Prasad does not have any symptoms and the self-isolation is purely based on the existing protocol, the source added. Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Sunday said that he had tested positive for COVID-19 and is getting admitted to a hospital following the advice of doctors. (PTI)
Delhi, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu have begun to show signs of a stabilisation in their active cases. But these trends are only a few days old, and can change anytime. In the case of Tamil Nadu at least, such a dip in active cases has been observed in an earlier period as well. But for Maharashtra, this is a relatively new trend.
No other major state, apart from Delhi, Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra is showing any signs of reduction in active cases right now. In fact, the active cases in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Bihar, Kerala, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, all fast growing states, have been rising rapidly in the last one month
Due to the novel coronavirus, veteran BJP leader Uma Bharti Monday said she would not attend the ground breaking ceremony of the Ram Temple in Ayodhya on August 5. Instead, Bharti said she would be on the banks of the Saryu river and visit the site and offer prayers to ‘Ram Lalla’ after the event had concluded. Her announcement, made on Twitter, came a day after Union Home Minister Amit Shah and a couple of Uttar Pradesh BJP leaders tested positive for the disease. Bharti said she was worried about those attending the ceremony, “especially Prime Minister Narendra Modi”. Bharti also said she had informed the temple authorities and the Prime Minister’s Office to remove her name from the list of attendees.
Telangana reported 983 new COVID-19 cases, taking the tally of positive cases in the state to 67,660. With 11 more deaths, the coronavirus toll in the state rose to 551, a state government bulletin said on Monday, providing data as of 8 pm on August 2. Out of the 983 fresh cases, 273 were from the Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC), a substantial fall compared to the previous days, followed by Ranga Reddy (73) and Warangal Urban (57) districts, the bulletin said. GHMC and few other districts which have been reporting higher numbers of positive cases saw a considerable decline in numbers on Sunday. The case fatality rate in the state was 0.81 per cent, while it was 2.13 per cent at the national level, it said.
The death toll due to COVID-19 in Odisha crossed the 200-mark on Monday with 10 more fatalities taking the total to 207, a Health Department official said. At least 1,384 more people have tested positive for the disease, pushing the tally to 36,297, he said. Of the new fatalities, three each were reported from Ganjam and Rayagada districts, two from Gajapati and one each from Kalahandi and Khurda. The fresh cases were reported from 26 districts. Of the 1,384 new cases, 873 were detected in quarantine centres, and 511 in localities. Ganjam district, Odisha's coronavirus hotspot, reported the maximum number of fresh cases at 331, followed by Khurda at 211 and Sambalpur at 93. The number of active cases in the state currently stands at 14,094, while 21,955 people have recovered from the disease so far.
Lok Sabha MP from Sivaganga, Karti Chidambaram has Covid-19. Taking to Twitter, he says, 'I have just tested positive for #Covid. My symptoms are mild and as per medical advice I am under home quarantine. I would urge all those who have recently been in contact with me to follow medical protocol."
I have just tested positive for #Covid. My symptoms are mild and as per medical advice I am under home quarantine. I would urge all those who have recently been in contact with me to follow medical protocol.
How effectively can children spread Covid-19? Until recently, it was widely believed that they are not strong spreaders. Recent studies, however, have suggested that children may spread the novel coronavirus at least as much as adults. A look at some of the research findings
According to the latest list of the World Health Organisation, at least 165 vaccines for novel Coronavirus were being developed across the world. There are possibly more, but still in the early stages, and not listed by WHO. Those that are listed have all entered at least the pre-clinical trials stage. Some of them are in the final stage of human trials, possibly only a few months away from hitting the market (a Russian vaccine promises to be ready in weeks, if not in days), while many others are just getting into animal trials, and are perhaps a couple of years away from becoming ready. 
Kosovo Premier Avdullah Hoti said he has contracted Covid-19 and will self-isolate for two weeks while working from home. Hoti, 44, said on his Facebook page that he has “no symptoms, except for a very mild cough.”
With nearly 53,000 new cases (52,972), the number of confirmed infections in India crossed the 18-lakh mark on Monday. As many as 771 casualties took place in the last 24 hours, pushing the death toll to 38,135. Of the 18,03,696 cases, 5,79,357 are active, while 11,86,203 have been cured.
A day after Karanataka CM Yediyurappa tested positive, her daughter has also been infected with the virus. She has been admitted to a hospital in Bengaluru.
CM Yediyurappa, meanwhile, is "doing well" and is "clinically stable." "Hon CM of Karnataka Shri BS Yediyurappa has been admitted to Manipal hospital for observation. He is doing well, is clinically stable and will be monitored closely by our team," Manipal Hospital said in a statement issued late Sunday night, hours after the leader was admitted. Yediyurappa was in home quarantine a couple of weeks ago after some staff members in his home office were found infected with the virus.
I have tested positive for coronavirus. Whilst I am fine, I am being hospitalised as a precaution on the recommendation of doctors. I request those who have come in contact with me recently to be observant and exercise self quarantine.
New Zealand will not be proceeding with a quarantine-free travel zone with Australia any time soon as a coronavirus outbreak spreads in the state of Victoria, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said. Officials from both nations have been working toward a “trans-Tasman bubble” to stimulate tourism and help their economies recover from the pandemic. While New Zealand has no community transmission of the virus, and has so far caught and quarantined anyone infected as they arrive at the border, Victoria has gone into a second lockdown as the outbreak there shows no signs of abating.
As Covid-19 cases climb steadily across the country, touching 17.50 lakh on August 1, general insurance companies, including standalone health insurers, have reported an over 240 per cent jump in claims for treatment for the disease over the previous month. As of July last week, 71,423 people had claimed Rs 1,145.87 crore from insurance companies towards Covid treatment, according to figures compiled by the General Insurance Council, the apex body of all general insurers. On June 22, only 20,965 people had made claims for Rs 323 crore
Despite this jump in insurance claims, in a sign of the low insurance penetration in the country, the health insurance claims received so far amount to just 4.08 per cent of the total number of people infected with the virus so far (17.5 lakh cases as on August 1). The average claim per person works out to Rs 1.60 lakh.
The Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI) has given nod to the Serum Institute of India (SII) for conducting phase 2 and 3 human clinical trials of the Oxford University developed COVID-19 vaccine candidate in the country. Government officials told PTI that the approval for conducting phase 2 and 3 clinical trials by the SII was granted by DCGI Dr V G Somani late Sunday night after a thorough evaluation based on the recommendations of the Subject Expert Committee (SEC) on COVID-19. "The firm has to submit safety data, evaluated by the Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB), to the CDSCO before proceeding to phase 3 clinical trials," a senior official said. "As per the study design, each subject will be administered two doses four weeks apart (first dose on day one and second dose on day 29) following which the safety and immunogenicity will be assessed at predefined intervals," the official said.
Singapore will require some incoming travelers who are serving their 14-day stay-home notices outside of dedicated facilities to wear an electronic monitoring device to ensure compliance. The rule will come into effect Aug. 10 and will apply to Singapore citizens, permanent residents, long-term pass holders and work pass holders, the government said.
Karnataka Chief Minister B S Yediyurappa tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday. Taking to Twitter, Yediyurappa said: "I have tested positive for coronavirus. Whilst I am fine, I am being hospitalised as a precaution on the recommendation of doctors. I request those who have come in contact with me recently to be observant and exercise self quarantine."
I have tested positive for coronavirus. Whilst I am fine, I am being hospitalised as a precaution on the recommendation of doctors. I request those who have come in contact with me recently to be observant and exercise self quarantine.
Issuing fresh guidelines for international passengers arriving into India, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) Sunday made a seven-day institutional quarantine mandatory for travelers, followed by home isolation for another 7 days.
Exceptions will be given in a few cases — human distress, pregnancy, death in family, serious illness, and parents accompanied by children below 10 years of age. They will be asked to self-isolate at home for 14 days. The new set of guidelines will come into place from August 8. Click here to read more.
In early May, an extremely well-sealed steel box arrived at the cold room of the Serum Institute of India, the world’s largest vaccine maker.
Inside, packed in dry ice, sat a tiny 1-milliliter vial from Oxford, England, containing the cellular material for one of the world’s most promising coronavirus vaccines.
Scientists in white lab coats brought the vial to Building 14, carefully poured the contents into a flask, added a medium of vitamins and sugar and began growing billions of cells. Thus began one of the biggest gambles yet in the quest to find the vaccine that will bring the world’s COVID-19 nightmare to an end. Click here to read more.
Congress leader Rahul Gandhi on Sunday wished Home Minister Amit Shah a speedy recovery, after he was found to be suffering from Covid-19.
Wishing Mr Amit Shah a speedy recovery.
 Maharashtra continues to remain the worst-affected state at over 4 lakh cases.
With lockdown restrictions having eased to a large extent and most activities having resumed, the novel Coronavirus got almost unhindered opportunities in July to spread in the Indian population. The result has been that more than 11 lakh people were found to have been infected with the virus in July. That is almost double the number of infected people before that.
That has meant that, on an average, more than 35,000 people were added every day in the month of July to the confirmed number of infections in the country. In the last three days, this number has been more than 50,000, with each day recording a number higher than the previous day.
Andhra Pradesh saw its Coronavirus numbers increase by almost nine times in July, while in Karnataka the number of infected people rose by more than seven times during this period. Bihar, Assam and Kerala added more than four times the number of infected people they had till June.
