Telangana, Andhra Pradesh Coronavirus July 8 Updates: As cases rise, 200 people volunteer for Covid vaccine clinical trial
Andhra Pradesh has 21,197 cases of the novel coronavirus, including 11,200 active cases, 9,745 recoveries and 252 deaths. With cases rising, over 200 people have come forward to volunteer for clinical trials of Covaxin, a candidate vaccine that is being developed in Hyderabad by Bharat Biotech in collaboration with ICMR. The vaccine trials will be conducted at Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences (NIMS), one of the 13 centres selected by ICMR across India.
Telangana, on the other hand, has 27,612 cases, which includes 11,012 patients under treatment and 16,287 who have recovered. At least 313 people have succumbed to the disease in the state. With 1,831 new cases on Tuesday, Telangana is among the states growing at the fastest rate in the country.
Governor Tamilisai Soundararajan met Chief Secretary Somesh Kumar and Principal Secretary (Health) Shanti Kumari on Tuesday to take stock of the Covid situation in the state. The meeting at Raj Bhavan was held in the wake of allegations that some private hospitals in Telangana were overcharging patients for Covid treatment.
Meanwhile, India’s total caseload rose to 7,42,417 Wednesday, including 2,64,944 active cases, 4,56,831 recoveries and 20,642 deaths. (Follow Coronavirus India LIVE Updates)

Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad Coronavirus (Covid-19), Lockdown News: Over 200 people contact NIMS Hyderabad to volunteer for vaccine trial; Telangana Governor takes stock of situation. Follow the latest news and updates from Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, and Karnataka.
Addition of 1,062 fresh COVID-19 cases in Andhra Pradesh took the total infections in the state to 22,259, while a record 1,332 patients were discharged from hospitals on Wednesday. The overall coronavirus toll rose to 264 as 12 new casualties were reported in the last 24 hours, a government bulletin said.
In all, 11,101 patients had recovered from the viral infectioni in the state, leaving 10,894 active cases. East Godavari joined Kurnool, Anantapuramu and Guntur in the list of districts having more than 2,000 cases each. Chittoor, Kadapa, Krishna and West Godavari districts have over 1,000 cases each.
After a significant fall over the last fortnight, the recovery rate increased slightly to 49.87 percent. After 10.77 lakh people were tested, the positivity rate also climbed to 2.07 percent.
A 94-year-old woman walked out of Gandhi hospital after recovering from COVID-19, making her the oldest patient in the state to successfully fight the disease. Though P Vijayalakshmi, from Chikkadpally in Hyderabad, was admitted with mild symptoms, doctors at Gandhi General Hospital, the state’s nodal COVID-19 treatment center, say that she was psychologically devastated at the time.
Her recovery, they say, is a fine example of how important mental strength is in overcoming the disease. Vijayalakshmi was admitted into the hospital on June 17 after she tested positive. Her younger son had succumbed to the disease and daughter-in-law, who had undergone renal transplantation and was in immunosuppressive therapy, also tested positive for the viral infection. She was discharged from the hospital on Monday.

In some non-Covid news, a woman was attacked by a man with a sickle over a land dispute in Telangana’s Wanaparthy district on Wednesday. The woman, who was left with deep gashes on her neck, hands and stomach, is in critical condition, the police said. During a skirmish between two families in Vuddaram village, an unidentified man pushed the woman to the ground and started bludgeoning her with a sickle. Officials said the man was angry after losing a court case regarding possession of the land, and had entered into an argument with the woman.
The office of the director of Public Health and Family Welfare, sharing the details of bed occupancy in government hospitals, said a total of 92.2 per cent beds were lying vacant as of date. According to data shared, only 660 of 11,928 isolation beds are occupied. Similarly, only 496 of 3,537 oxygen beds are occupied. In ICU beds, only 179 of 1,616 are occupied. On the whole, 15,746 of the total 17,081 beds are lying vacant according to the health department.
1879 new #COVIDー19 cases in #Telangana on Tuesday.Total cases- 27612,Active cases-11012,deaths-313. Total samples tested till date-128438.@IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/te8C1LtmzA



Telangana has 27,612 cases, which includes 11,012 patients under treatment and 16,287 who have recovered. At least 313 people have succumbed to the disease in the state. With 1,831 new cases on Tuesday, Telangana is among the states growing at the fastest rate in the country. The state stepped up testing last month after the High Court pulled up the government. However, at the turn of the month, alarmed by the surge in cases, it scaled down testing. 
Till June 15, there were 5,193 Covid-19 cases in the state. This went up to 15,394 by June 29. After increasing the tests to over 4,000 per day on June 24, authorities brought it down to 2,648 on June 29.
In some non-Covid news, a high-powered committee probing the leak of styrene vapour at LG Polymers factory at Visakhapatnam has recommended filing of cases against all directors and managers of the company, shutting it down or shifting it out, or converting it into a non-polluting unit. At least 12 persons died and more than 300 affected by the leak on May 7 early morning.
“The company cannot be allowed to function in its existing form at RR Venkatapuram. It should be shifted out or it should turn into a non-polluting unit,’’ stated the 4,000-page report submitted to Chief Minister YS Jagan Reddy on Monday. He directed authorities of various departments to initiate legal action against those responsible under relevant laws. Read Sreenivas Janyala's report
More than 200 people have contacted the Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences (NIMS), Hyderabad, to volunteer for clinical trials of Covaxin, a candidate vaccine for Covid-19 that is being developed by city-based Bharat Biotech in collaboration with ICMR. “We have noted their names and contact details and we will contact them as per our requirement,” an official said. NIMS is one of 13 centres selected by ICMR to conduct the vaccine trials. Read more 
The Telangana High Court on Tuesday directed the state government to file a report on a petition alleging that private hospitals were charging excessively from COVID-19 patients beyond the limit prescribed by the government.
The PIL was filed by advocate Srikishan Sharma seeking a direction to the stategovernment to take action against the private hospitals for charging exorbitantly and issue guidelines for maintaining transparency in the matter of treatment and billing against all the patients. The petitioner submitted that Maharashtra government has imposed restrictions by way of a notification restricting the maximum bill that can be claimed by private hospitals but there is no such restriction imposed by Telangana government. The petitioner also cited some of the bills of few patients, including of a COVID-19 patient, to substantiate the "exploitation" by private corporate hospitals.
A division bench, comprising Chief Justice Raghvendra Singh Chauhan and Justice B Vijaysen Reddy, referred to the petitioner's contention and asked for a report from the government over the matter. The Court, while posting the matter to July 14, also issued notices to the Central government and the private hospitals.
R K Roja, former south Indian actor and YSR Congress Party MLA from Nagari assembly constituency in Andhra Pradesh, was Tuesday afternoon seen driving around a newly inducted 108 ambulance, posing for photos and urging people to shoot videos in the constituency in Chittoor district. Roja, who is also the Chairperson of Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation, was present there to “receive” the ambulances.
Last week, the government inducted 412 new ambulances into the existing fleet and a few of the vehicles were allocated to the Nagari constituency which reached there Tuesday. Andhra Pradesh is reporting a huge surge in Covid-19 positive cases and there is huge demand for ambulances to take suspected Covid patients to hospitals and testing centres. On July 7, the state reported 1178 new positive cases taking the total to 21,197, while 13 deaths were reported taking the total number of deaths to 252. READ MORE
Andhra Pradesh recorded over 1,000 fresh COVID-19 cases for the second consecutive day, taking the aggregate to 21,197 while another 13 patients died, taking the overall toll to 252 on Tuesday. According to the latest bulletin, a total of 1,178 people tested positive for coronavirus in the state with 1,155 of them being locals.
Twenty-two people from other states and one from abroad also tested positive. Kurnool continued to report more COVID-19 deaths, with four added on Tuesday, for a total count of 85 so far. Anantapuramu reported three fresh deaths, Chittoor and Visakhapatnam two each and Prakasam and West Godavari one each. In the last 24 hours, 762 patients had recovered and were discharged from hospitals in the state.
The state now has 11,200 active cases after a total of 9,745 patients had recovered. It also completed testing of a little over 10.50 lakh people till date, the bulletin said. (PTI) 
The number of samples tested for novel Coronavirus in India crossed the 10-million mark (1 crore) on Monday. While that, no doubt, is a significant milestone, India’s testing numbers are still low compared to many other countries.
China, whose number of infections has all but remain static at around 85,000, has carried out more than 90 million tests, according to data on the Worldometer website. The same database shows that the United States has tested more than 38 million samples, Russia has carried out more than 21 million tests, while even the United Kingdom, right now, is marginally ahead of India.
All these countries, however, began testing much earlier than India, because the outbreak started at least two months earlier there. In India, regular testing started happening only in the first week of March after the emergence of the first few cases. Starting with just one laboratory, the Pune-based National Institute of Virology, that was testing samples at that time, India now has a network of more than 1,100 laboratory that are conducting these diagnostic tests. More than two lakh samples are being tested every day now, compared to just a few hundred when the exercise had begun.
Hospitalisation amidst the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, even if a patient has not tested positive for the novel coronavirus may add several thousands of rupees in out-of-pocket expenses as insurers are unwilling to cover the costs of personal protective gear under the insurance policy as they fall in the list of non-payable items. COVID-19 positive patients could end up spending as much as half of their hospital bills and non-COVID patients a fourth of their hospital bills on personal protective equipment (PPE) during an extended hospitalization. This is because, considering the highly contagious nature of the deadly virus, hospitals have made it mandatory for their entire staff to wear protective gear, including bodysuits and face shields, which indirectly adds to the costs of patients. Read more here
The New York Times reported recently that 239 scientists from 32 countries have written an open letter to the World Health Organization (WHO) that the virus causing Covid-19 can remain airborne for a period of time and thus transmit itself. The scientists have “outlined the evidence showing that smaller particles can infect people, and are calling for the agency to revise its recommendation”. The paper titled ‘It is Time to Address Airborne Transmission of Covid-19’ is likely to be published in a scientific journal next week.
A respiratory infection such as Covid-19 is transmitted through droplets of different sizes. If the droplets particles are larger than 5-10 microns in diameter, they are referred to as respiratory droplets; if they are smaller than 5 microns in diameter, they are referred to as droplet nuclei. “According to current evidence, Covid-19 virus is primarily transmitted between people through respiratory droplets and contact routes,” the WHO states. However, the letter written by the scientists suggests aerosol transmission too can happen. Read more here

New building design of the Secretariat (Telangana CMO)The Chandrashekhar Rao-led dispensation in Telangana began razing of the old secretariat building complex. The move comes days after the Telangana High Court dismissed a bunch of PIL's challenging the state's decision to construct a new secretariat complex here demolishing the existing one.
The chief minister's office released the elevation design of the proposed 'integrated secretariat new building,' which would come up at the existing site. Rao laid the foundation stone for the new administrative complex on June 27 last year. Later, some PILs were filed in the High Court against the construction of the new one alleging that it would cause unnecessary burden on the state's exchequer.
Opposition parties have protested the construction of new secretariat buildings by demolishing some of the existing structures. "While Chief Ministers across the country are busy building infrastructure to accommodate COVID-19 patients, unfortunately Telangana has a Chief Minister, who is busy demolishing the existing infrastructure, which can easily be turned into a massive facility to accommodate thousands of COVID-19 patients," Chief Spokesperson of Telangana BJP, K Krishna Saagar Rao said in a statement on Tuesday.
"BJP strongly protests the attrocious action of the TRS Government in demolishing the old secretariat buildings for false prestige of CM KCR in the midst of a global pandemic crisis. Telangana State is now rated as the second highest in the rate of infection, while it stands at number one position in conducting lowest number of Covid-19 tests in its population category. CM KCR seems to be hardly worried and untouched by these alarming statistics. Every other state in the country is building make shift hospitals and expanding their bed count, while Telangana State Government is demolishing existing infrastructure which could be very well turned into a make shift Covid-19 hospital to meet the existing demand for hospital beds," a statement from the state BJP read. It further stated, "BJP strongly believes the old secretariat buildings complex could have been easily turned into a 20,000 bed facility. As the buildings are located in the heart of GHMC area, they could have been the best location to use for Covid-19 treatment. Telangana state currently has more than 90 per cent cases originating from GHMC area. These buildings are functional and strong, and demolishing them is a pure waste of tax payers money."
A 94-year-old woman, P Vijaylaxmi, who was undergoing treatment for Covid-19 at Gandhi Hospital in Hyderabad was discharged yesterday, ANI reported.
 A security personnel uses a thermal screening on workers while preparing vegetable garlands ahead of the Goddess Durga's Shakhambari Devi festival, at Kanaka Durga temple in Vijayawada, Thursday, July 2, 2020. (PTI Photo/File)
A Telangana government bulletin said that out of the 2,501 beds available in four government hospitals, 284 were occupied by Covid-19 suspected cases and 877 by inpatients. With nearly 1,161 beds occupied, the number of vacant beds was 1,340.
Health Minister E Rajender said that the Telangana Institute of Medical Sciences (TIMS), a sports facility converted into a Covid-19 hospital is ready to serve patients.He posted a video about the facilities being provided in the hospital. He further said that patients with mild symptoms should be treated in district hospitals, while those who are asymptomatic should be kept in home isolation and their health monitored.
[ie_content_priority_driven exkeyword="Coronavirus, Explained" hlabel="Coronavirus Explained" hlink="https://indianexpress.com/section/explained/" pid="6372640" mlabel="Click here for more" link="https://indianexpress.com/about/coronavirus/"]
In Hyderabad, more than 200 people have contacted the Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences (NIMS), to volunteer for clinical trials of Covaxin, a candidate vaccine for Covid-19.
Officials on Monday said since July 3, they have received over 200 phone calls and emails from people eager to volunteer for trials of the vaccine, which is being developed by city-based Bharat Biotech in collaboration with ICMR.
Meanwhile, India's coronavirus tally crossed 7 lakh on Tuesday, with around 22,252 new cases and 467 deaths were reported in the last 24 hours, taking the total number of fatalities to 20,160.
After a shutdown of more than 100 days, all ASI-protected monuments in Hyderabad reopened for the public on Monday (July 6). The ASI’s Hyderabad circle takes care of historical monuments like the Charminar, the Warangal Fort, the Thousand Pillared Temple and Ramappa Temple in Warangal, the Alampur Temple in Gadwal district, and a couple of prehistoric excavation sites. Among these, the Golconda Fort witnesses the maximum tourist footfall.
