Coronavirus April 20 highlights: Doubling rate now 7.5 days; 80 of 100 patients have no or mild symptoms, says ICMR
Coronavirus India Tracker LIVE Updates: About 80 out of 100 COVID-19 patients have no or mild symptoms of the disease, the ICMR, Delhi, said on Monday. Stating that infection prevention management is an important part of the disease management, Health Ministry said the doubling rate of the cases has gone down from 3.4 days before lockdown to 7.5 days now.
According to the latest health ministry updates, India Monday recorded the biggest single-day spike in the number of cases —1,553 cases in the last 24 hours — taking the number over 17,000. Of the 17,656 cases, 14,255 are active and 2842 are cured. At least 559 deaths have been reported in the country so far, 36 of which was reported in past one day.
Meanwhile, as lockdown restrictions are being eased in various parts of the country, the Centre has shot a letter to the Pinarayi Vijayan-led government stating that some of its decisions including opening eateries, allowing travel are in violation to its guidelines. On the other hand, while Delhi, Karnataka and Punjab governments said there will be no relaxations till the lockdown ends on May 3, the K Chandrasekhar Rao government in Telangana decided to extend the complete lockdown in the state till May 7. Follow Indian Express Covid-19 tracker for latest updates
Globally, there are over 2.4 million confirmed cases with 1.6 lakh deaths. The toll in New York — one of the worst hit places — dropped, a sign Governor Cumo said means that the state is “on the other side of the plateau.” French Prime Minister Emmanuel Macron, meanwhile, warned that his compatriots will need to “learn to live with the virus” after the country lifts its lockdown. In Tel Aviv, over 2,000 Israelis hit the streets to protest anti-democratic measures passed during the coronavirus crisis and the policies of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, while maintaining social distancing.
(Follow our coverage on coronavirus pandemic and India lockdown)

After reports that a large number of patients, both with coronavirus symptoms and other illnesses, are being made to run from one hospital to another for admission, a task force created for critical care management of COVID-19 patients has suggested that private hospitals open their out-patient departments (OPDs) to treat all sorts of patients. Private hospitals have, however, resisted the suggestion stating that they do not have enough staff and fear the risk of shutdown if a coronavirus infected patient is admitted.
The state government and BMC observed that private hospitals are not sharing the burden of treating COVID-19 patients or even those with no coronavirus symptoms. In a video-conference Monday, private hospitals were advised to start normal operations and create a system of triage to refer COVID-19 patients to dedicated treatment facilities, while admitting other patients.
“We had a video-conference with CM Uddhav Thackeray on Sunday, too. A discussion is on to see if private hospitals can open OPDs. This will help patients who need treatment for illnesses other than coronavirus,” said Dr Gautam Bhansali, a member of the critical care task force. Read more
As many as 224 cases of COVID-19 were reported from Gujarat on Monday, taking the state’s tally to 1956, while 10 died of the viral infection, taking the death toll to 73.
According to Principal Secretary, Health, Jayanti Ravi more than half of the deaths analysed by her department, were of patients who had risk factors, along with the presence of multiple co-morbidities. “Risk factor is categorised as those aged above 60 years, those aged below 5 years or pregnant women. We found that 35 of the COVID-19 deaths or 52.23% were patients categorised as high-risk and had multiple comorbidities. As many as 21 deaths that is 31.34% deaths were in high-risk patients who had a single comorbid condition. Four deaths were such who were high risk patients but had no comorbidity. Seven other deaths were seen in patients who were neither categorised as high-risk patient nor had any comorbidity,”she said. Two of Monday’s deaths also saw no co-morbid condition.
Ahmedabad reported 152 new cases, taking the district total to 1,243 cases. Since Sunday, the AMC conducted 264 rapid antibody tests as well, with eight results turning positive. On Sunday evening, the government decided that those willing to pay and get treated in private hospitals, can do so in Sterling Hospital, HCG Hospital and Narayana Multispeciality Hospital. Read more
With 466 new COVID-19 cases reported Monday, the tally reached 4,666 across the state. Mumbai accounted for 308 of these new cases, taking its total count to 3,032. Nine deaths were reported in the state, with the overall toll reaching 232.
Of the new cases in Mumbai, 53 were mediapersons, who had been recently tested by the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC). The 53, all asymptomatic, have been moved to a hotel in Goregaon, where they are being kept under isolation. The BMC had last week tested 167 media professionals who had been reporting from the field.
Mumbai Mayor Kishori Pednekar, too, went gone into self-quarantine as he had come in contact with some of the journalists who have tested positive. “I was present during the check-up of the journalists. My driver’s and my reports are negative but some journalists whom I met in the last five days (since the tests were conducted) have tested positive, so I have decided to isolate myself,” said Pednekar. Read more
THE HARYANA government on Monday ordered a probe after four samples reported positive for the novel coronavirus by a private laboratory tested negative in confirmation tests done at the government centres. The private lab, one of five authorised by the Centre to conduct COVID-19 tests in Haryana, was banned on Monday from conducting any further tests.
State Health minister Anil Vij directed ACS (Health) Rajiv Arora to conduct a thorough probe into the matter, and barred the SRL lab from conducting any further tests. “Since four tests conducted by the private lab have been found wrong, all tests that this lab has conducted so far will be re-tested in the government’s lab,” Vij told The Indian Express. Read more
Indian Railways is targeting to make 1 lakh coveralls by May 31 for the country’s frontline staff battling the COVID-19 outbreak . As of now, it has procured raw material for 60,000 of this critical Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and distributed it among its various zones. Railways’ coverall samples were passed by DRDO laboratory in Gwalior following which it picked up material from the four government-authorised suppliers of raw material for PPEs to stitch the coveralls.
While raw material for 60,000 coveralls is already distributed among all zonal railways, the same for another 40,000 has been requisitioned and will reach by April-end so that the figure touches a lakh by end of May. The coveralls that Railways is making are for half the cost of those available in the market, officials said. Including GST, the railway coverall costs Rs 447 per piece, whereas the ones available in the market are for Rs 808.50.
“We have tied up with the government-approved raw material suppliers. What we are making are not just cheaper but also superior in quality compared to what is available in the market,” said Arun Arora, Principal Chief Mechanical Engineer of Northern Railway, which got its coverall samples passed by the DRDO lab and then sent the design and tutorial videos to other zones to follow. Northern Railway is also the nodal procurement body for coverall-related material in all of Indian Railways. Read more
Bengaluru’s Bicycle Mayor wants govt to encourage employees to use bicycles: As post-lockdown measures are heavily discussed by the authorities and citizens across the country, Bengaluru’s ‘Bicycle Mayor’ Sathya Sankaran Monday suggested companies should encourage the use of bicycles among employees once restrictions are eased. In an open letter, Sankaran listed various reasons why cycling to work would be an effective option, especially in times of the COVID-19 pandemic. Cycling, being an individual mode of transport, would ensure physical distance among people while decreasing chances of intermingling, Sankaran explained.
Six foreigners found hiding in Uttarakhand caves for 25 days: Six foreign nationals were found hiding in caves near Ganga river in Pauri Garhwal district of Uttarkahand for the past 25 days after they had to check out of hotels after they ran out of money during the lockdown. All the six tourists —four men and two women— have been put in quarantine after a medical examination in which they did not show any symptom of COVID-19 infection.
Prisoners from 4 jails cook food for migrant labourers: Inmates of four Haryana jails are doing their bit in the battle against COVID-19 by cooking food for migrant labourers and others rendered jobless by the lockdown. Haryana Jails Minister Ranjit Chautala told The Indian Express Sunday that prisoners at Bhiwani, Panipat, Jind and Rohtak (Sunaria) jails are preparing food using ration arranged by various groups. “At each prison, food for at least 2,000-2,500 persons is prepared and packed. The packets are then supplied to daily wagers, industry labourers and rickshaw-pullers who have been left unemployed following the lockdown,” said Chautala.
Liquor stash found in ambulance; milkman, cop arrested: With liquor vendors shut since lockdown was imposed, authorities in Delhi have cracked down on those selling or transporting alcohol illegally, sometimes using ingenious ways, and seized nearly 54,000 liquor bottles of different brands including a large stash from an ambulance, news agency PTI reported. In the first two weeks of April, 155 people were arrested for allegedly illegally supplying or carrying liquor. Among them were a Delhi Police constable and a milkman, according to data shared by Delhi Police.
Teacher climbs tree to cross internet hurdle to teach students: Subrata Pati, a history teacher, works from a nest perched on a neem tree, giving lessons to his students on events of seminal importance that shaped civilizations and obliterated them, conquests by kings and generals, and horrors of war and pestilence, as Covid-19 savages the world. Taking classes online is a battle Pati, who teaches at two educational institutes in Kolkata, is fighting from his native Ahanda village in West Bengal’s Bankura district, where his cell phone screen blips to life one moment and lies dead frozen the next. Now, every morning, the 35-year-old man climbs up the neem tree next to his house and parks himself on a makeshift wooden platform tied to its branches and receives uninterrupted signals on his cell phone he uses to teach his pupils. (PTI)
Postmen delivering essentials to homes, hospitals in Ranchi: Postmen in Ranchi have been keeping busy delivering medicines and other essentials to homes and hospitals, news agency PTI reported. Some of them have also found the addressees sceptical about receiving parcels or registering their digital signature on their phones due to threat of virus transmission, he said. “In a couple of areas, our personnel had to return with the parcel as people were scared of touching the consignment,” said Sadhan Kumar Sinha, the senior superintendent of post offices in Ranchi. Sinha also said that postmen had on occasions delivered items even after midnight.
A day after Pimpri-Chinchwad was declared as containment zone, stricter implementation of lockdown failed to create the expected impact on Monday, with grocery shops, vegetable and milk vendors appearing confused over the civic body’s order. The absence of newspapers also added to the confusion.
Late on Sunday evening, Pimpri-Chinchwad Municipal Commissioner Shravan Hardikar had issued an order, allowing grocery and vegetable shops to remain open between 10 am and 2 pm, while announcing the “enforcement of stricter containment plan” to check the spread of coronavirus. However, most grocery shops in the area started operations since early Monday morning.
BJP leader Sarang Kamtekar said though police vehicles were seen moving in the area, some grocery shops were opened from around 9 am till late afternoon. D G Baliga, a 75-year-old resident of Pimprigaon, said he saw people going out on morning walk. “Since the order was issued late in the evening and with newspapers not being delivered, I think people must not have known about it,” he said. Read more
In line with his decision to not ease the statewide curfew despite relaxations allowed by the Centre, Punjab Chief Minister Capt Amarinder Singh on Monday clarified that industrial units being permitted to function in non-containment zones would be required to align with the state government’s earlier orders, as well as the guidelines of the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA).
The MHA guidelines are in consonance with the state government’s decision to allow certain units to function with labourers staying on-site, the chief minister pointed out, adding that the Centre had accepted Punjab’s suggestion on this count.
Amarinder, who had announced on Sunday that there would be no relaxation in curfew in the state till May 3, on Monday asked the DCs to immediately clamp down on all activities contributing to the spread of COVID-2019 in containment zones and any other areas where the local administration sees a hotspot developing.
At the same time, he asked the DCs to facilitate opening of industrial units in non-containment areas by meticulously complying with instructions issued by the state government on April 18. All MHA guidelines and conditions should be strictly complied with by the district administration, he added.
TWO DAYS after the Punjab government allowed opening of bookshops, AC and cooler outlets, it withdrew its order Monday after the Centre pulled it up for “diluting” relaxation guidelines, calling it a violation of the Disaster Management Act, 2005.
The state government had Saturday allowed shops selling school, college and university material, as well as outlets that sell or repair air-conditioners and coolers to open. The government had also allowed delivery of non-essential items through e-commerce and vehicles providing these services were allowed to run with permission.
In a letter to Punjab Chief Secretary Karan Avtar Singh, Union Home Secretary Ajay Bhalla said, “Punjab government…has circulated revised guidelines for lockdown measures to all departments, district collectors, superintendent of police and other heads of departments….it is observed that the GoP has allowed opening of some activities which are prohibited in the aforesaid order dated April 15 of MHA. Such additional activities allowed by GoP, inter alia, including distribution of books by bookshops to school and college students and to treat the sale of air conditioners, air coolers, fans and their repair shops as essential goods/services. This amounts to dilution of guidelines issued by MHA and violation of MHA order dated April 15, issued under the Disaster Management Act 2005.” Read more
A day after civic bodies in Pune and Pimpri-Chinchwad declared their jurisdictions as containment zones for COVID-19, the police commissionerate in both urban limits on Monday imposed conditional curfew till April 27, allowing specific time windows during the day for procurement of essential supplies.
The conditional curfew will not be applicable to essential and emergency services, including police, defence forces, health and civic staff, personnel involved in COVID-19 response, people involved transportation and provision of essential commodities. Read more
Tripura Chief Minister Biplab Kumar Deb Monday appealed to the people living along the Indo-Bangla border areas to keep a strict vigil and make sure that no one can cross the border and enter Tripura from Bangladesh during coronavirus outbreak. Deb said Border Security Force (BSF) and state police were asked to intensify patrolling along the border. However, the chief minister has asked those living in there to carry on ‘janata patrolling’ to strengthen measures preventing illegal immigration to ward off any virus threat from Bangladesh.
The central government on Monday decided to convert “surplus rice” available with the Food Corporation of India (FCI) into ethanol for use in making alcohol-based hand-sanitizers. The decision was taken during a National Biofuel Coordination Committee (NBCC) meeting headed by Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas Dharmendra Pradhan. Read the full story here

West Bengal government on Monday started conducting rapid antibody tests as per ICMR directives in “red zones' where containment measures are going. The rapid antibody tests were done in Kolkata's Belgachia urban slum area where there were reports of considerable outbreak.

India entered into Day 27 of nation-wide lockdown on Monday. Hers, Express photoographers brings to you exclusive pictures from across the country. Find more exclusive visuals here



Maharashtra's total number of coronavirus cases reached 4,666 and toll stood at 232 on Monday. Of the total numbers, Mumbai recorded 3,032 cases and 139 deaths.
Watch the video to get the top ten pointers on today's COVID-19 updates from across India and the world.

Even as it earns praise within India and outside for its deft handling of the coronavirus pandemic and the ‘flattening’ of the infection curve, the Kerala government is in the dock for allegedly breaching privacy of 1.75 lakh people under quarantine in the state by striking a deal with a US-based tech firm Sprinklr to handle the data compiled from them. So, what is the Sprinklr controversy? How did the LDF government respond to the allegations levelled against it? What is the political relevance of the controversy? Read our explainer by Vishnu Varma here

A total of 750 rapid testing kits were made available to the health department in Gurgaon today. Officials said these will make testing a "faster" process. The kits have been used to test five suspected COVID-19 patients in Sohna and adjoining villages so far.
Kerala COVID-19 update
The Indian Army Monday said that all personnel who are to rejoin their posts after either coming back from leave or finishing their courses will undergo a 14-day quarantine.
The Army said that every individual will be categorised into green, yellow and red categories. All personnel, it said, who have completed 14-day quarantine period will be classified as green, while those who need to undergo the quarantine will be under yellow. Symptomatic individuals, who require isolation and treatment in a COVID hospital will be put under the red category. Read more here
 Patients maintaining social distance outside a private clinic in Bibvewadi in Pune. (Express Photo: Pavan Khengre)
The Delhi government, a day before the lockdown is set to be eased in the country, announced the city will not lift any prohibitions as the number of coronavirus cases was on the rise. Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal said the decision will be reviewed after a week. He repeatedly referred to the situation in European countries such as Italy, Spain and France in making a case for prohibitory measures, which have been in force in the city for nearly a month now.
Punjab also ruled out out any relaxation in the curfew in the state, except as needed to ensure free procurement of wheat, till May 3, when the situation will again be reviewed.
Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh ordered strict enforcement of the curfew in all districts by the DCs, with no relaxation or concessions even during the Ramzan period beginning this week.
 Delhi Police at check-post to ensure people are following lockdown.
In Maharashtra, Pune and Thane were also declared containment zones, with boundaries sealed off.
On a linkedln post on Sunday, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said the coronavirus outbreak had significantly changed the contours of professional life and these days, home was the new office and internet the new meeting room.
“I have also been adapting to these changes. Most meetings, be it with ministerial colleagues, officials and world leaders, are now via video conferencing,” Modi said.
 Chandigarh: Health department workers taking a door to door survey of residents after a rise in Covid-19 cases in the city, on Sunday. (Express Photo by Kamleshwar Singh)
The need of the hour is to think of business and lifestyle models that are easily adaptable, the PM said. “Doing so, would mean that even in a time of crisis, our offices, businesses and commerce could get moving faster, ensuring loss of life does not occur,” he said.
Today, the world is in pursuit of new business models, PM Modi said, adding that India, a youthful nation known for its innovative zeal, can take the lead in providing a new work culture.
Explained: Guidelines for non-immigrant visa holders in the US amid COVID-19
Government offices to reopen with senior staff from April 20
In Mumbai, migrants lose hope, money: For how long, they ask
Govt wants to use PMJAY for free coronavirus testing in private labs, but 2 cr families missing from database
Don’t miss these articles on Coronavirus from the Explained section:
-How coronavirus attacks, step by step
-Mask or no mask? Why the guidance has been shifting
-Besides a face cover, should I wear gloves when I go outdoors?
