J&K opens up commerce, industry; clampdown still in place in red zones
The administration of Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) on Tuesday announced new guidelines on the lockdown norms in the Union Territory.
Liquor shops will reopen across the UT from Wednesday and the administration has decided to allow various activities, including weddings.
All private hospitals, clinics and nursing homes (including OPD services) can resume normal functioning, the order said, adding that the other activities allowed include all e-commerce and courier services, all agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry and related activities; home deliveries by restaurants and hotels; banking and financial services as well as self-employed service providers like plumbers, technicians and electricians.
Canteens/eateries at bus stands, railway stations and airports have also been allowed to open, but only with passes in Red districts.
Similarly, barber shops and salons may also open in all areas, except within the limits of the Municipal Corporations of Jammu and Srinagar.
While weddings can now be held, a maximum of 50 people will only be allowed. In red zone districts, permission from the Deputy Commissioners will be a must for these events. A maximum of 20 people will be allowed to attend funerals.
The UT government on Tuesday classified all the districts of Kashmir except Ganderbal and Bandipore, besides Kathua, Samba and Ramban in Jammu as red zones. It listed Bandipora, Ganderbal, Reasi, Udhampur and Jammu as orange zones, and Doda, Kishtwar, Poonch and Rajouri as green zones.
Additionally, in orange zones, all the shops in market areas, bazars and market complexes will also be allowed to open, except for single/multi brand malls. Pointing out that no passes will be needed in these districts, the order said that the shops within the limits of Municipal Corporations will remain open from 9 am to 5 pm. All private offices with 50 per cent staff, besides sports activities in stadiums and sports complexes without the presence of spectators will be resumed.
The government has also allowed inter-district movement of vehicles subject to a maximum of three people including driver in case of four wheelers and with no pillion ride in case of two wheelers. The cab aggregators and auto rickshaws have been allowed to ply within the district with a maximum of two passengers.
In green zone districts, apart from activities allowed in orange districts, private offices will reopen with 100 per cent staff, public passenger transport (buses/tempo travelers, cab aggregators, auto rickshaws etc) with upto 50 per cent seating capacity on intra district routes and between contiguous Green districts, besides barbour shops, saloons and parlours in all areas.
It also allowed inter district movement of private vehicles between a pair of Green/Orange districts, but without crossing a Red district.
In Red districts, it decided to allow only shops selling essential items like groceries, fruits, vegetables, bakeries etc., besides private offices with only 33 per cent attendance with passes for the staff as prescribed.

📣 The Indian Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel (@indianexpress) and stay updated with the latest headlines
