Coronavirus April 29 Highlights: With 475 cases today, Mumbai total over 6,500
The Home Ministry Wednesday said the government will issue fresh guidelines on May 4, a day after the nationwide lockdown ends on, which shall give “considerable relaxations” to many districts. This comes even as Ministry issued revised guidelines allowing movement of migrant workers, students, tourists and pilgrims stranded in different states.
The death toll due to the coronavirus pandemic crossed 1,000-mark on Wednesday to reach 1,008 while the total number of positive cases soared to 31,787 including the 7,796 people who have been treated and discharged so far. As many as 73 deaths and 1,897 new cases have been reported in the last 24 hours. Maharashtra, which continues to be worst-hit by COVID-19, has reported 11,106 infections and 400 deaths so far.
On the global front, the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) has so far claimed at least 2,16,989 lives and infected at least 31,14,659 people worldwide since its outbreak, according to a tally by John Hopkins University. The United States continued to be the worst-affected, with over 10,03,625 cases and over 57,000 deaths. President Donald Trump has projected that coronavirus deaths in the United States could reach 70,000, but said original projections were much higher as he explained why voters should consider re-electing him in November. He also doubled down on China for failing to tame the coronavirus at its very origin, saying it has led to 184 countries “going through hell”.

The state health department on Tuesday issued two orders making 14-day rotational duty mandatory for those working in COVID-19 hospitals and forming 11 teams headed by senior bureaucrats and assigned with specific tasks for containing the spread of the virus.
For dedicated COVID-19 hospitals, the policy outlines that there will be four teams comprising physicians, anaesthetists, medical officers, paramedical and service staff with each team working seven days in ICU, seven days in isolation wards and then quarantined for the next two weeks. The quarantined team shall be tested on the seventh day and if negative, “they can be deployed directly to dedicated COVID-19 hospitals’ isolation wards,” the policy states. Read more here
With about 3,000 samples already in a queue for coronavirus testing, Punjab now faces the mammoth task of testing about 7,000 people who have started returning to the state after being stranded for days at Hazur Sahib in Nanded, Kota and Jaisalmer. Earlier, the state had decided to pool test the returnees, but with 26 among them testing positive Wednesday, the government has decided to test each one of them. Read more here
A STARTUP entrepreneur from Gwalior has developed a remote-controlled robot nursing dispenser to help minimise contact between medical staff and coronavirus patients.
Aparnesh Shukla, who runs Webyee, an automation startup in Gwalior, is the son of acting Vice Chancellor of Wardha-based Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya Hindi Vishwa Vidyalay. He had come to stay with his parents to celebrate Holi but got stuck in Wardha due to the nationwide lockdown. Read more here
NAGPUR reported the death of a 70-year old man, suspected to be due to coronavirus, on Wednesday. Authorities are not yet attributing it to the coronavirus as the patient was asymptomatic.
“A 70-year old man from the city’s Mominpura locality died on Wednesday afternoon at the Indira Gandhi Government Medical College. He was admitted on April 21 but was asymptomatic. He was administered nebuliser earlier in the day and he also had his lunch. But later, he suddenly collapsed. But since he was asymptomatic despite being positive, with some co-morbidity factors like blood pressure abnormality, our death committee will ascertain the cause of death. Only after that will we be able to comment on it,” Municipal Commissioner Tukaram Mundhe told The Indian Express. Read more here
Madhya Pradesh Wednesday announced that the Secretariat and the other two main government buildings in the state capital will open from Thursday, by ensuring that attendance does not exceed 30 per cent.
Class I and II officers will decide on the staff they want, but will have to ensure no one is called from containment areas. Drivers will not be allowed to enter the main secretariat building. Thermal screening and sanitisers will be available at the entrance.
The government also asked collectors to give permission for marriages in home by limiting the number of guests to five. ``There is no bar on marriage ceremonies held in homes. If someone asks permission, collectors should give it,’’ health minister Narottam Mishra said.
Indicating that the government will allow many more economic activities in green zones after May 3, Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan said by May 1, the number of workers engaged in MNREGA works could reach 10 lakh. ACS Manoj Shrivastava said 7.24 lakh workers have already been provided work under MNREGA.
TO DRAW the attention of state and central governments to the plight of stranded migrant labourers stuck for over a month now, various organisations working with the underprivileged will observe a day’s fast on May 1, observed as International Labour Day and Maharashtra Day, to press for the demand to send workers back to their home states. Read more here
Gilead Sciences Inc on Wednesday said its experimental antiviral drug remdesivir helped improve outcomes for patients with COVID-19, and provided data suggesting it worked better when given earlier in the course of infection.
The closely watched drug has moved markets in the past few weeks following the release of several studies that painted a mixed picture of its effectiveness.
Gilead provided information on two clinical trials underway. The company said a study being conducted by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAIS) met its main goal in helping patients with COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus.
At the Kerala-Tamil Nadu border, Sofia Marin Banu glanced down at her precious bundle of joy in her arms for the first time on Wednesday, 15 days after the baby girl was born in a hospital in Nagercoil. Amid the ongoing COVID-19 lockdown,officials of Kerala and Tamil Nadu witnessed the emotional reunion of mother and child at Kaliyikkavila. The healthy newborn was handed over to Marin by medical staff of the private Erankulam Lisie Hospital, where she underwent a complicated surgery for a serious heart problem soon after her birth through cesarean section. Read more here
Congress leader P Chidambaram on Wednesday welcomed the government's decision to allow inter-state movement of stranded migrants and students and suggested running sanitised point-to-point trains to help move these people, saying buses would not be sufficient for the task. "I welcome the decision of the government to allow inter-state movement of migrant workers and students after testing them by bus. This has been a demand of the Congress party since mid-April," he said on Twitter.
I welcome the decision of the government to allow inter-state movement of migrant workers and students after testing them by bus.This has been a demand of the Congress party since mid-April.
In a bid to ensure food security and employment generation, Kerala today announced a Rs. 3,000 crores package for the revival of the agriculture sector. Chief Minister, Shri Pinarayi Vijayan announced that the government plans to spend Rs. 3,000 crores in the next one year to boost food production and revive agriculture. Out of this, Rs. 1,500 crores will be raised from the plan allocation of LSG bodies and various departments and the remaining Rs. 1,500 crores will be provided as loans from NABARD and the Co-operative Sector. The agriculture department has come up with a massive programme to use the fallow land for farming from next month. The project will be implemented in all LSG bodies by utilising the wasteland in their areas. The aim of the Agriculture Department is to revitalize agriculture, increase the revenue of farmers, attract youths to farming, and also as a rehabilitation project for expatriates who have lost their jobs.
The Agriculture Department has prepared a draft plan and it has been decided to finalise the plan and start the implementation soon. The plan also envisages increasing livestock, milk and egg production, and aquaculture development. All local bodies will make necessary changes to the annual plan before May 15th for the implementation of this plan to include food security projects.
Maharashtra inched towards the 10,000-mark with the addition of 597 coronavirus cases, while 32 more patients succumbed to the disease - 26 of them in Mumbai - taking the toll to 432 on Wednesday, said a state health department official. With the addition of 597 new coronavirus cases, the tally in Maharashtra stood at 9,915 on Wednesday, just 85 shy of the 10,000-mark. Mumbai city alone reported a jump of 475 COVID-19 cases, taking the tally to 6,644 along with death of 270 patients so far.
The 58,355 Covid-19 deaths in US exceeded the number of American soldiers who lost their lives in the Vietnam War that lasted for two decades. The US accounts for nearly one-third of the 3.1 million cases globally and one-fourth of the over 213,000 global fatalities.
“We continue to pray for the victims as well as for those Americans who are grieving their lost ones and their loved ones. There’s never been anything like this. We suffer with one heart but we will prevail. We are coming back, and we’re coming back strong,” US President Donald Trump said at the White House during his remarks on the Paycheck Protection Programme.
“Now that our experts believe the worst days of the pandemic are behind us, Americans are looking forward to the safe and rapid reopening of our country, he said.
Caught in a constitutional entanglement over his membership in the state legislature, Maharashtra Chief Minister and Shiv Sena leader Uddhav Thackeray has approached Prime Minister Narendra Modi for cooperation in resolving the crisis, sources said.
“He (Thackeray) called Prime Minister to talk about his nomination. He asked for help saying if it does not happen he would have to resign,” said a source. The source added that the Prime Minister said he would look into the matter and get more details.
Although the Maharashtra cabinet had recommended Thackeray’s name to be nominated to the Legislative Council, the upper House in Maharashtra, from the Governor’s nomination quota, Governor B S Koshyari has not approved it. BJP leaders have pointed out that the approval had legal barriers, as it would be violating the provisions in The Representation of the People Act, 1951.
Five ministers of the Karnataka government have been asked to quarantine after they were identified as primary contacts of the cameraperson of a private Kannada news channel who tested positive for the COVID-19 on April 24. According to the sources at state health department, the cameraperson had interacted with the five ministers in the duration of April 20 to April 23 in various press meets. He had also conducted an interview with a minister.
The state health department has quarantined his 40 other primary contacts, including his wife and two-and-a-half-year-old daughter in a private hotel. On Tuesday his wife and daughter tested negative.
The Home Ministry Wednesday said the government will issue fresh guidelines on May 4, a day after the nationwide lockdown ends on, to fight the coronavirus pandemic in the country. 
New guidelines to fight #COVID19 will come into effect from 4th May, which shall give considerable relaxations to many districts. Details regarding this shall be communicated in the days to come.#coronavirus update#StayHomeStaySafe@PMOIndia @HMOIndia @MoHFW_INDIA
Gadchiroli and Chandrapur police have arrested nine and 11 foreign nationals respectively on charges of visa violations. From Kazagistan and Kirgyzstan, the foreigners had come to the cities in connection with the Tablighi Jamaat programme in March.
"They were earlier booked under Foreigners' Act for violating visa rules and were put into quarantine. We arrested nine in Gadchiroli on Wednesday and a local court has remanded them in magisterial custody," Gadchiroli Superintendent of Police Shailesh Balkawde said.
He added: "They had come here on tourist visa and were participating in religious programmes. That's violation of visa rules."
In Chandrapur, however, the 11 nationals from the same two countries were arrested on Tuesday but were released by the local court there on bail.
Nagpur police have also booked eight Myanmar Tablighi nationals but haven't yet arrested them.
Dairy major GCMMF, which markets its products under the Amul brand, on Wednesday launched a milk-based beverage product 'haldi doodh' (turmeric latte) to boost immunity, amid the outbreak of coronavirus.
The Gujarat Cooperative Milk Marketing Federation (GCMMF) posted a turnover of over Rs 38,000 crore last fiscal.
"Amul has launched an affordable and easily accessible immunity booster beverage - Amul Haldi Doodh. Haldi doodh or golden milk also called turmeric latte is known for its anti-bacterial and anti-inflammatory properties," the cooperative said in a statement.
The price is Rs 30 for 200 ml easy-open-end can.
"This product is being packed at state-of-the-art manufacturing plants in west and north India having a production capacity of 2,00,000 packs per day," the cooperative said. (PTI)
Manipur Government on Wednesday have sent four busses to Guwahati to bring back as many as 84 stranded passengers who are currently lodged at the Manipur Bhawan, Guwahati.
The buses left Imphal around 5:30 pm and will return to the state on May 1.
Manipur police department reportedly requested its counterparts in Assam and Nagaland police for the smooth evacuation operation.
According to the health department of Manipur, the passengers will be received at Mao entry point (Manipur-Nagaland border) between 6 am to 12 noon.
It said that those who are symptomatic will be referred to RIMS and JNIMS hospitals while the non-symptomatic persons will be escorted to quarantine centres at Imphal for testing.
During the testing, if anyone is found negative they will be sent to their homes for home quarantine, said the department. 
(Reported by Jimmy Leivon)

An angry mob of migrant workers Wednesday ransacked their site manager’s office at IIT-Hyderabad and pelted stones at a police party, demanding pending wages and permission to travel back home.
A sub-inspector of police sustained injuries and a police vehicle was damaged as tension mounted at the campus, located in Kandi of Sangareddy district on the outskirts of Hyderabad.
The outburst of workers, officials say, was waiting to happen. As many as 2,354 workers are employed in construction works on the campus by a private contractor. Since the announcement of the nationwide lockdown, work has been stalled. They workers have been restricted to their camp adjoining the IIT campus, and being provided ‘bland food’. They were also frustrated by the non-availability of alcohol, gutka, meat, etc., said the police. Read more
Prime Minister Narendra Modi Wednesday spoke to Bangaldesh PM Sheikh Hasina and greeted her and the people of Bangladesh on the Holy Month of Ramzan. The two leaders discussed the COVID-19 situation and ways India and Bangladesh can collaborate in the fight against it.
Spoke to PM Sheikh Hasina to greet her & the people of Bangladesh on the Holy Month of Ramzan. We discussed COVID-19 situation & ways India and Bangladesh can collaborate in the fight against it. Our relationship with Bangladesh will continue to be one of our highest priorities.
 Coronavirus India LIVE updates: External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar said the BRICS had an important role to play in shaping global economic and political architecture.
In less than 15 days, the number of hotspot districts (red zones) has shrunk to 129 from the 177 that were identified on April 15, after three weeks of implementing the curbs. The number of orange zone districts has risen from 207 on April 15 to 250 now, sources in the Health Ministry said. Coronavirus has spread to more districts over the past few weeks but clusters of larger and faster transmission have emerged in the major urban centers of Delhi, Mumbai, Pune, Indore, and Ahmedabad.
The government has maintained that due to the lockdown imposed on March 24, the doubling time of coronavirus cases has increased. In the week before the lockdown, the doubling time across India was 3.4 days. By the week ending April 27, it had improved to 10.77 days, an analysis of daily data shows.
While there were 21,632 “active” COVID-19 cases across the country till Monday, only about 80 of them were on ventilators. Top government sources said this is in line with the daily pattern seen so far.
Meanwhile, even as some states have started plasma therapy, the Union Health Ministry on Tuesday said there is “no evidence to use it as treatment”, and warned against adopting this line of treatment without following proper protocol and getting approval.
External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar on Tuesday said the BRICS (Brazil-Russia-India-China-South Africa) had an important role to play in shaping global economic and political architecture.
India lockdown diary, Day 35: Panchkula resident gets surprise; Thane cop rescues 7-year-old and more
At a video conference of the foreign ministers of BRICS, Jaishankar said, “Covid-19 is not only posing a great risk to health, the well-being of humanity but is also severely impacting the global economy.” Stressing on mutual cooperation in dealing with the coronavirus pandemic, Jaishankar said, “We need to provide support to businesses to tide over Covid-19 crisis and ensure livelihoods are not lost.”
 India has so far lost more than 1,000 lives to Covid-19. (File photo)
Meanwhile, in a major drive to contain Covid-19 before the lockdown ends on May 3, the Jammu and Kashmir administration has started conducting a health audit of its 1.3 crore residents.
With 45,000 field-level officials, including 3,000 doctors from Covid clinics, going door to door, the massive exercise is the first across the country, official sources said. The Union Territory has surveyed about five lakh households comprising nearly 25 lakh people in the past five days, sources added.
The Maharashtra government has said in a new circular that hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) may be administered to all high-risk contacts of confirmed COVID-19 patients, and those admitted to quarantine centres. It has also recommended that the drug be administered, after obtaining consent, to all health workers, nurses, and frontline workers, including those working in COVID care centres, COVID health facilities, and dedicated COVID hospitals in the state.
Also Read:
Last week of lockdown, challenge ahead: Fewer hotspot districts now, but zones keep changing
35-yr-old travels 14 days to UP village from Mumbai, dies in hours
