Mann ki Baat: Apologise for these harsh steps, says PM Modi
Mann ki Baat: Prime Minister Narendra Modi while addressing the nation in his monthly radio program ‘Mann ki Baat’ apologised for the harsh decision of a 21-day nationwide lockdown. “The fight against coronavirus is unprecedented, therefore we had to take unprecedented and harsh decisions,” he said. “Social distancing is the first step to fight coronavirus, but it doesn’t mean that we reduce social interaction,” he added.
Praising the doctors for their continuous efforts, PM Modi said, “Acharya Charak had said that one who serves patients without desiring any material gain, is the best doctor. I salute every nurse today, you all are working with incomparable dedication. World is celebrating 2020 as the international year of the nurse and midwife”.
On Monday, the Prime Minister announced a 21-day nationwide lockdown to fight the virus and curb its spread. However, since the lockdown, thousands of migrant labourers, who have lost their jobs, are on the move, going back to their villages.

"I will upload some videos of how I stay fit in the time of quarantine," says PM Modi. "I am not a fitness expert. I'm just a practitioner," he adds.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi says, "Social distancing is the first step to fight coronavirus, but it doesn't mean that we reduce social interaction". "I was extremely hurt when I came to know that some people are misbehaving with those who are being advised home quarantine. We need to be sensitive and understanding. Increase social distancing but reduce emotional distancing," he adds.
"Doctors' sacrifices remind me of ancient Hindu sage who said one who serves patients without financial motive is a real doctor. 'Daily life heroes' such as sanitation and utility workers are ensuring that our daily lives are continuing smoothly. 
PM Modi talks to a Pune doctor, Dr Borse. Dr Borse says, "We have discharged 7 coronavirus patients from our screening centre. Others are doing better and getting fit day by day. These people are going to be well and will get discharged soon". "We also talk to people who test negative. We tell them about home quarantine. We advise them to use masks, sanitise their hands regularly, use a handkerchief while sneezing, and that they are not supposed to go out of their homes for a limited period of 14 days". PM Modi motivates him and says that the country will win this fight because of doctors and nurses like them.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi spoke to a Delhi doctor, Dr Nitish Gupta, about how the staff and hospital is treating their patients. Gupta says, "We have already sent 16 patients home. We counsel them and tell them that it is nothing to be frightened of, and that you will get fine and we will send you home after tests become negative". "The patients get frightened at the start, but then when we continuously talk to them, they get fine". PM Modi motivates him to keep fighting and that the whole nation is with them.
PM Modi talks to Agra's Ashok Kapoor, whose whole family tested positive for coronavirus. Kapoor tells about how his two sons caught the virus, how they were treated at Delhi's Safdarjung hospital when they were admitted, and how his family fought his way through it.
PM Modi invites coronavirus victim Ramagampa Teja to share his experience on Mann ki Baat, has one-on-one chat with him. Teja tells PM Modi and the nation that he was initially frightened but felt reassured because of doctors and hospital staff. Teja adds that even after getting discharged from hospital he follows hygiene including washing hands
'I hope my country people will forgive me for my sudden decisions. I apologise for all the discomfort that you are facing, but this is the only step that we could have taken to curb the spreading of coronavirus in the country. I apologize for taking these harsh steps which have caused difficulties in your lives, especially the poor people. I know some of you would be angry with me also. But these tough measures were needed to win this battle': PM Modi
"I usually talk about several things during my Mann ki Baat program but with such a situation prevailing in the country, I cannot talk about anything else," says Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced on Saturday that his month-end program 'Mann ki Baat' on Sunday will focus on the prevailing situation due to the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) disease in the country.
Tune in tomorrow at 11. Tomorrow’s episode will be focused on the situation prevailing due to COVID-19. #MannKiBaat pic.twitter.com/wWybvdLW8k
The prime minister's month-end program 'Mann ki Baat' was broadcast on DD national, All India Radio, and his app. Akashvani will broadcast the program in regional languages right after the Hindi one finishes.
In last month's 'Mann ki Baat,' said “New India” was not prepared to work under old approaches, and in this “New India”, women were taking the lead in facing new challenges. Citing examples of women doing extraordinary work throughout the country, Modi also said “age and disability” were no longer hurdles in achieving goals.
