Coronavirus May 28 Highlights: Delhi sees highest single-day spike, Haryana tightens borders
Home Minister Amit Shah Thursday spoke to chief ministers of states to ascertain their views on the coronavirus crisis, its containment strategies and the fifth phase of the nationwide lockdown that starts June 1.
In Delhi, 1024 new cases of the coronavirus were reported in the last 24 hours, taking the total number of confirmed cases to 16,281 in the city. Death toll in the city stands at 316.
The government Thursday said there are about 30 groups in India, big industry to individual academics, who are trying to develop a vaccine for the coronavirus. Dr K Vijayraghavan, principal scientific advisor to Government to India, said it takes a long time to develop a vaccine but since we need to develop it in one year, the world is investing in over a 100 vaccines at the same time. The entire process will cost 2-3 billion dollars.
With India reporting 6,566 coronavirus cases in the last 24 hours, the total tally in the country reached 1,58,333 on Thursday including 4,531 deaths and the 67,691 people who have been treated and discharged so far.
On the global front, the United States has surpassed a jarring milestone in the coronavirus pandemic: 100,000 deaths. That number is the best estimate and most assuredly an undercount. But it represents the stark reality that more Americans have died from the virus than from the Vietnam and Korea wars combined. As many as 5,695,155 people have been infected worldwide so far. While the death toll stood at 355,688, at least 2,380,088 have recovered, according to a tally by John Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Centre.

A 58-year-old fireman, identified as Rafiq Shaikh, died due to COVID-19 on Thursday.Shaikh was posted at the Goregaon Fire Station and is the second fire fighter to die from COVID-19 in last one week. He was due for retirement next month.
According to the Mumbai Fire Brigade, he was ill and was suffering from cold, fever and breathlessness. His test result of novel coronavirus came positive on May 21 and was later admitted to Agarwal Hospital in Virar. However, on Thursday he suffered a heart attack and passed away.
Chief Fire Officer PS Rahangdale said, "He was retiring next month. So far 41 fire brigade personals are found positive of COVID-19."
Earlier, a fireman attached with Gowalia Tank died on Sunday. His COVID-19 test results came positive after his death. Officials said that out of 41 fire brigade personals infected four are in ICU and three have been recovered and discharged. Recently, municipal commissioner I S Chahal had reveal that over 1500 municipal staff are infected and 25 succumbed to COVID-19. (ENS Mumbai)
As Madhya Pradesh reported 192 more positive cases in the last 24 hours on Thursday, the novel coronavirus infection reached 51 out of 52 districts in the second largest state in the country.
Newly created Niwari is the only district that has not reported any positive case so far. Located on the border of Uttar Pradesh, as many as 16,220 people were screened on the district’s border and kept in quarantine. Out of them 13,668 have completed 28 days in quarantine.
Of the 45 samples collected from the district, 38 have tested negative. While three samples were rejected, results of four are still awaited. Hoshangabad, Agar Malwa, Anuppur and Alirajpur districts reported positive cases in the past but have no active cases now.
Meanwhile, Indore reported 78 new cases taking the count of positive cases to 3260 so far, out of them 1583 active. Bhopal’s count with 17 new cases mounted to 1373. Ujjain reported 25 cases to take its count to 639. The death toll respectively in Indore, Bhopal and Ujjain is 122,51 and 54. Neemuch on Rajasthan border reported 34 cases to take its count to 149. Burhanpur on Maharashtra reported has so far reported 293 cases.
--Milind Ghatwai reports from Bhopal
Two more persons tested positive with the novel coronavirus in Tripura on Thursday, raising the state's total COVID-19 tally to 244. However, 167 among them have recovered so far and were discharged from hospital while 74 are active cases.
Chief Minister Biplab Kumar Deb said "1050 samples have been tested today for COVID-19, out of which 2 people detected positive. Both of them have returned from Maharashtra. Positive Cases: 244. Active Cases: 74. Discharged: 167. Migrated: 03."
Home Minister Amit Shah Thursday spoke to Chief Ministers of all States to ascertain their views on the current coronavirus crisis, its containment and the next phase of lockdown that starts June 1.Home Minister Amit Shah speaks to Chief Ministers of all States to ascertain their views on current #COVID19 crisis, its containment and the next phase of lockdown.
Home Minister Amit Shah speaks to Chief Ministers of all States to ascertain their views on current #COVID19 crisis, its containment and the next phase of lockdown. @IndianExpress
Gurgaon has crossed the 400-mark, with 68 new cases of Coronavirus reported today. Total count now 405, of who 3 have succumbed to the infection.
Gurgaon crosses the 400 mark, with 68 new cases of Coronavirus reported today. Total count now 405, of who 3 have succumbed to the infection. @IndianExpress
The Bombay High Court heard a petition seeking to set aside the state government’s May 21 notification stipulating taking over 80 per cent beds in private hospitals and nursing homes across the state. The petitioner has also sought free-of-cost Covid-19 treatment at all hospitals, including private institutions, across Maharashtra.
The plea filed by educationist and social worker Sagar Jondhale, through advocate Anand Jondhale, said the rates of private hospitals would amount to a bill of nearly Rs 1 lakh to a Covid-19 patient admitted at a general ward of any hospital in the state. It also stated that the notification had wrongly permitted private hospitals to charge separately for pharmacy and pathology services. (ENS Mumbai)
In Delhi, 1024 new cases of the coronavirus were reported in the last 24 hours, taking the total number of confirmed cases to 16,281 in the city. Death toll in the city stands at 316.
1024 new cases of #Coronavirus reported in the last 24 hours, taking the total number of confirmed cases to 16281 in the city. 13 more deaths have been updated in the health bulletin today. Total number of deaths due to #Coronavirus in Delhi is 316 @IndianExpress
The total number of Covid-19 positive cases in Manipur has reached 55 with 11 more tested positive on Thursday.
Manipur Health department said nine of the 11 cases were men and 2 women taking total active cases to 50. While the conditions of the 11 patients were stable, they have been shifted to COVID care facilities at JNIMS and RIMS hospital, the department said.
The department further informed that one of the COVID-19 positive cases lodged at JNIMS hospital have been recovered and discharged on Thursday bringing the recovered cases to five.
Tripura allowed entry to 125 persons who returned from different parts of Bangladesh through Akhaura International Check Post (ICP) on Thursday.
At least 235 Indians from Tripura, Assam, Manipur and Meghalaya stranded in Bangladesh since lockdown was imposed were evacuated through border check posts today. Among them, 129 were from Tripura.
However, the ICP authorities allowed 125 and returned four since their passports were found to have address and spelling discrepancies.
'We have kept all of them under quarantine. Five persons weren't allowed to enter due to passport discrepancies,' Tripura Law Minister Ratan Lal Nath told a press conference this evening.
Tripura reported 242 new Covid-19 cases on Thursday.
Meanwhile, people of the state stuck at Bangalore, Chennai, Trivandrum, Kolkata and Delhi are en route back home Shramik Special trains, buses etc.
According to latest reports, 17867 out of 28,081 persons placed under surveillance in the state have completed 14 days observation period and were discharged. 343 persons are still housed in different quarantine centers and 4871 are under home quarantine. 24,126 samples were tested as per COVID control room reports, out of which 242 tested positive with the virus. However, 165 have already recovered and two persons were transferred to other states.
In Jammu and Kashmir, 115 new COVID-19 cases detected, tally rises to 2,036.
In the biggest single day spike, Kerala reported 84 COVID-19 cases on Thursday taking the infection tally to 1,088, while a man hailing from Telangana, who reached here from Rajasthan and tested positive, succumbed to the virus.
The deceased had boarded the Jaipur-Thiruvananthapuram special train on May 22 and along with his family reached here without the requisite documents.
The man, who was under observation and later admitted to the general hospital here after heshowed symptoms of the virus, died on Wednesday, a government press release said. His sample result was received today. It is not clear if the Telangana man's death would be added to the state's tally.
Six people have died of the infection in the state. (PTI)
The NHRC has send notices to the Union Home Secretary, the Railways and the governments of Gujarat and Bihar over hardships faced by migrants onboard trains due to delay in services and lack of food and water allegedly leading to sickness and death of some of them, officials said on Thursday.
In a statement, the National Human Rights Commission observed that the "state has failed to protect the lives of the poor labourers onboard the trains".
The NHRC has taken suo motu cognisance of media reports that the trains which are ferrying migrant labourers are not only starting late but are taking many additional days to reach destination, it said.
"In one of the reports, it is alleged that many migrant labourers lost lives during their journey by train due to longer duration and no arrangements for drinking water and food etc," the statement said. (PTI)
Karnataka government has clarified earlier announcement regarding banning flights from five states. State Minister J C Madhuswamy says that the state had not announced a complete ban on flights from five states, but to "lessen (incoming) air traffic" from these states.
JUST IN: #Karnataka govt clarifies earlier announcement. Minister J C Madhuswamy now says that the state had not announced a complete ban on flights from 5 states, but to "lessen (incoming) air traffic" from these states. @IndianExpress
Declaring the residence and office of Governor Lalji Tandon as inner zone, sealing off two of the three entry gates and restricting the entry of visitors are among the steps taken in the wake of six residents of employees' quarters in Raj Bhavan, Bhopal, testing positive.
There are 64 staff quarters on the sprawling premises. The employees and their family members living in quarters will not be allowed to leave the campus for three days, except for medical emergency.
Five members of the family of a cleaner and a peon have tested positive so far. The governor has again tested negative. His ADC and OSD are among key persons who also tested negative. The 85-year-old governor was tested for the first time after a senior bureaucrat in the health department had tested positive weeks ago.
The peon who tested positive had entered the main Raj Bhavan. The quarters where the infected persons lived have been declared containment zones and employees ordered to work from home.
The health of those working in the kitchen and other attendants will be monitored daily. Gate numbers 1 and 3 have been sealed. Governor's Secretary Manohar Dubey said all precautions have been taken and the situation will be reviewed from time to time.

Tally of Covid-19 cases in Mumbai's Dharavi slum rises to 1,675 with 36 new patients; death toll remains unchanged at 61, reports PTI.
Tamil Nadu reported 827 new Covid-19 positive cases today, taking the total cases to 19,372.
827 new #Covid19 positive cases reported in #TN today, taking the total cases to 19,372. #Chennai reported 559 cases today. 12 deaths reported today, taking the toll to 133. So far 936 Maharashtra returnees have tested #Covid_19 positive, says #TN Health Minister. @IndianExpress
Karnataka bans flights from Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and Rajasthan in view of COVID-19 cases increasing from these states, govt decides in a Cabinet meeting. Incoming passengers by rail/road from Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat also banned.
#Karnataka bans flights from #Maharashtra, #TamilNadu, #Gujarat, #MadhyaPradesh, and #Rajasthan. Incoming passengers by rail/road from MH, TN, GJ also banned in view of #COVID19 cases increasing from these states, govt decides in a Cabinet meeting. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/nTbabvVDlb
A 58-year-old fireman succumbed to COVID-19 on Thursday. He is second staff from Mumbai Fire brigade who died due to infection. He was posted at Goregaon Fire Station and due for retirement next month. So far 40 fire fighters have been infected.
Three flyers of IndiGo's Delhi-Jammu flight 6E955 on Tuesday have tested positive for COVID-19, the airline said. Six more passengers on IndiGo's Bengaluru-Coimbatore flight and 2 on Delhi-Coimbatore flight on Wednesday test positive for COVID-19. (PTI)
Vadodara on Thursday reported 28 new coronavirus cases, taking its overall tally to 951. While the death toll in the district stands at 42, total 548 people have been discharged after recovery.
Vadodara #Covid19 tally at 951 with 28 new cases todaySamples tested 141Discharged 18 (Total:548)Total death toll 42@IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/qTKIjjtkzS
 Coronavirus India LIVE updates: The ICMR has outlined the need for research on the effects of the coronavirus in lungs and other organs of the human body
The Indian Express scrutinised detailed bills of six Covid patients admitted in top private hospital chains in Delhi, Mumbai, and Kolkata and found two striking trends: those with comorbidities end up with heftier bills; and, second, with no specific treatment or drug available, the cost of drugs and PPE of staff constitute the biggest variable. The bills range from Rs 2.6 lakh for a six-day stay to Rs 16.14 lakh for almost a month – in all these cases, except one, all patients recovered.
As a share, the number of Covid patients needing treatment may still be low but the concern is a growing one — paying private hospital bills amid looming economic distress and uncertainty over course of treatment.
As of last week, less than 15 per cent of active Covid cases required hospitalisation. Of those in hospital, just 2.25 per cent needed admission in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU); 1.91 per cent required oxygen, and just 0.004 per cent required ventilatory support. But these numbers will rise as the case load moves up and in cities, especially hotspots, more patients knock on doors of private hospitals.
Leaving the ruling BJP red-faced in Himachal Pradesh, the party’s state president, Dr Rajeev Bindal, resigned from the post Wednesday, “on the basis of high moral grounds”, amid a corruption probe into the procurement of medical supplies by the government for the Covid pandemic.
Bindal, 65, was Speaker of the State Assembly until January, when he was picked by BJP national president J P Nadda to head the party in the state. His resignation comes a week after the vigilance and anti-corruption bureau arrested the director of health services, Dr A K Gupta, following a probe into an audio clip in which two men are purportedly heard discussing the handover of Rs 5 lakh.
Joe Biden has released a video marking the grim US milestone of 100,000 Americans killed by the coronavirus, saying somberly, “To all of you hurting so badly, I’m so sorry for your loss” and “This nation grieves with you.”
In the video released on Wednesday evening, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee directly addresses those who have lost relatives and friends. Evoking the personal tragedies he’s faced in his own life, Biden said, “I think I know what you’re feeling.”
