Parliament HIGHLIGHTS: Both Houses adjourned till tomorrow
Parliament HIGHLIGHTS: Minister of Health and Family Welfare Harsh Vardhan updated the Parliament over the risings coronavirus cases in India and how the government is tackling it. Speaking at the Rajya Sabha, Vardhan said that the latest data on Coronavirus is published and that the Centre will target clusters regularly. He also said, “the Centre is fully assisting the sates to fight the deadly virus.”
Earlier in the day, Prime Minister Narendra Modi ruled out adjournment of Parliament over Coronavirus. Addressing the BJP Parliamentary party meeting today he express disappointment over letter by some MPs to curtail the session. He said, “we are representatives of the 130 crore people of the country,” adding that the Parliament will run till 3rd April. PM Modi also asked the MPs to visit their constituencies to make people aware about Coronavirus.

The Lok Sabha has been adjourned till tomorrow.
Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla held a meeting with officers of concerned agencies to take stock of the preparedness to monitor and control the spread of coronavirus in Parliament House Complex.
The Rajya Sabha has been adjourned till tomorrow.
The House is now discussing the Medical Termination of Pregnancy (Amendment) Bill, 2020.
The Lok Sabha passed the Aircraft (Amendment) Bill, 2020.
The union minister in Lok Sabha said that comedian Kunal Kamra tried to disrupt normal functioning. 'It would have gone unnoticed, he recorded the incident himself and put it on social media.The concerned airline put him under no flying period. Others also followed.', ANI reported.
The House now takes up for discussion the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2019.
The Ministry of Home Affairs informed the lok Sabha that the number of migrants from J&K residing in different parts of country is 64,951.
"Before 75th Independence day of India, Banihal to Katra link will be completed and India will be connected from Kanyakumari to Baramulla through rail.", said Minister of Railways Piyush Goyal in Rajya Sabha.
Minister of Railways, Piyush Goyal in Rajya Sabha said, "As of today, eleven and a half-months have passed of this year (2019-20) and no passenger lost his/her life due to train accident."
Discussion on The Aircraft (Amendment) Bill, 2020 continues in the Lok Sabha.
MoS G Kishan Reddy in a written reply in Lok Sabha said that there has been no major terror attack took place in the country during the period from August 5,2019 to March 10,2020. He was replying to a question on the total number of terrorist incidents in country after revocation of Article 370 in Kashmir:
MoS MHA G Kishan Reddy, in a written reply to a question on the total number of detention centres in Assam, said that a detention centre at Matia, Goalpara with a capacity of 3,000 is under construction. "There is no NRC detention camp/center in Assam.", he added.
On being asked whether government has granted licences under the Foreign Contributions Regulation Act (FCRA) to NGOs during the last 3 years, in a written reply in Lok Sabha said, 1,011 in 2017, 520 in 2018 and 683 in 2019 licenses were granted in last 3 years.
In the Rajya Sabha, the discussion on the working of the Ministry of Railways continues.
On being asked if the ongoing Budget session of Parliament should be curtailed due to coronavirus, BJP MP Hema Malini told ANI that, "We all are continuing with our work but a large number of people gather here...I think it is worth giving a thought to this matter."
AAP leader Sanjay Singh takes a dig at PM Modi over privatisation of Railways saying 'why government is ready to sell everything.' Railway is the life line of our country and the government should make efforts to improve it. 
Rajya Sabha discusses privatisation of  Railways. Kerala CPI(M) minister speaks. 
The parliamentary committee on Transport, Aviation and Tourism has accepted TMC MP Derek O' Brien's suggestion to take cognisance of the effects of coranavirus and has called a meeting of the concerned ministries on Wednesday, party sources said. The committee will convene a special meeting on Wednesday with the tourism and civil aviation ministries, seeking an update on the precautions taken by them in view of the infection that has led to three deaths in India so far, they said. In a letter to committee chairperson T G Venkatesh, O'Brien said the aviation and tourism sectors will be directly affected by the spread of the coronavirus.
With the outbreak of coronavirus expected to further hit the economy, a demand to compensate workers losing jobs due to the slowdown and waiver of interest on loans of small borrowers was raised in Rajya Sabha on Tuesday. The issue of impact of slowing economy on sectors such as automobiles and IT was raised through Zero Hour mentions in the House. Jose K Mani of the KC-M said outbreak of coronavirus pandemic has added to economic woes.
 The Budget session of the Parliament is scheduled to conclude on April 3. (File)
On Monday, the Central Sanskrit Universities Bill, 2019 was passed by the Rajya Sabha. The Bill seeks “to establish and incorporate Universities for teaching and research in Sanskrit, to develop all-inclusive Sanskrit promotional activities and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.”
Congress leader Rahul Gandhi Monday questioned the government in Lok Sabha on why it was scared of naming wilful bank loan defaulters. “I was not allowed to ask a supplementary question in Lok Sabha, this takes away my right as MP,” he said, adding that he was hurt as it was the Speaker’s duty to protect his right to speak. Earlier, Minister of State Anurag Thakur had responded to his query where he sought the names of 50 wilful defaulters and said that information relating to the defaulters was given on the Central Information Commission (CIC) website.
In the wake of the cancellation of airline and railway tickets amid the spread of coronavirus, CPI (M) Kerala Rajya Sabha MP Elamaram Kareem Monday requested the government to forgo the cancellation charges of passengers. Congress floor leader in Lok Sabha Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury had earlier given an adjournment motion notice over the issue of ‘imposition of excise duty on diesel, petrol and other petroleum products’ and the ‘price of petrol and diesel in the country respectively’.
