Coronavirus, May 9 Highlights: ICMR teams up with Bharat Biotech to develop indigenous Covid-19 vaccine
The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) in a statement Saturday announced its partnership with Bharat Biotech International Limited to develop a fully indigenous vaccine for COVID-19.
The vaccine will be developed using virus strain isolated at ICMR’s National Institute of Virology, Pune, the body said in a statement.
Meanwhile, the number of Covid-19 cases in the country neared the 60,000 marks, including 1,981 deaths. While the number of active cases stood at 39,834, as many as 17,846 persons have recovered so far. The state of Maharashtra continues to remain the worst-affected with 19,063 cases and 731 deaths, followed by Gujarat.
On the global front, the number of coronavirus cases approached 4 million with over 2,75,160 deaths. The US has recorded the most fatalities at 77,180, followed by the United Kingdom (31,316) and Italy (30,201).

The state government Saturday announced that it will provide free bus services within Maharashtra to take migrant workers and other persons, including tourists and students, stranded in various parts of the state, except in Covid-19 containment zones, due to the nationwide lockdown. Read more here
On his first day in office after taking charge as the Mumbai municipal commissioner, Iqbal Singh Chahal asked officials to ramp up contact-tracing in slum pockets, implement isolation aggressively and move more high-risk contacts to institutional quarantine. Read more here
Maharashtra’s Covid-19 count crossed the 20,000 mark on Saturday with 1,165 new cases. The total case count in the state is now 20,228. The state also recorded its highest single-day death toll at 48, taking the total count to 779. An assistant sub-inspector was among those who died. Read more here
A Covid19 positive patient, who is currently undergoing treatment at the GMERS hospital in Gotri in Vadodara, has delivered a baby boy. The 35-year-old patient was in her last weeks of pregnancy when she was diagnosed with Covid19 and shifted to GMERS on May 2.
A release from the district administration stated that the baby boy was born on Saturday afternoon and weighed 2.7 kilograms. "Usually, as per protocol, a pregnant Covid19 patient is advised a cesarean section for safety but the doctors of the gynaecology department ensured that the patient comfortably delivered the child through natural labour."
The mother and child are doing well, the release stated, adding that the baby has been tested for Covid19 among other vital tests for newborns as per the protocol.

At least 50 migrants from Uttar Pradesh working on the Ahmedabad-Gandhinagar metrorail project here are restive and waiting to go home. The project is being executed by the Gujarat Metro Rail Corporation, a 50-50 joint venture between the Centre and the Gujarat government. Read more here
An alert loco-pilot of a goods train averted a mishap on Friday evening in Pune district after he applied emergency brakes to bring the train to halt about 100 metres from 20 labourers who were walking on the tracks. The incident took place the same day as the mishap in Aurangabad district, when 16 migrant labourers were killed on the railway tracks. Read More
AIIMS Director and renowned pulmonologist Dr Randeep Guleria, who reached Ahmedabad to take stock of the COVID-19 situation, said that lockdown cannot be an indefinite strategy and community participation will be the way ahead.
He observed that the high mortality rate in Gujarat could be because of the issues of late reporting of symptoms due to the stigma attached to the disease. Read More
Close to 6,000 migrant workers left Mumbai in five Shramik Special trains on Saturday with two more train, carrying another 2,000 workers, were preparing to leave. This was the highest number of trains to leave in a single day, so far. Of the five, at least two left from CSMT for the first time following a nationwide lockdown while a third one from CSMT is being planned. Read More
Chaos ensued at the Sama Sports Complex in Vadodara on Saturday afternoon as over 1,500 migrants, slated to board two different trains to Uttar Pradesh, gathered at the venue for their designated “medical screening.” The confusion, senior officials in the administration said, happened when a group that was to board a special train to Jaunpur in UP, had arrived to be screened. Around the same time, another group of migrant labourers, who were to board a train to Gorakhpur later on Saturday night, also arrived at the venue to be screened as messages of the camp went viral among migrants in the city. Read more here
Seventeen persons have tested positive for COVID-19 in Tripura on Saturday, raising the total number of COVID cases in state to 136, out of which 132 are active. All of the new patients are from Border Security Force (BSF) 86 battalion at Ambassa in Dhalai district, where 49 patients were confirmed earlier.
ALERT !17 persons found #COVID19 POSITIVE in Tripura today from 86th-Bn #BSF, Ambassa. No Civilian found POSITIVE among them.✔️Total #COVID19 active cases in Tripura now stands: 132✔️ Transferred out: 02✔️Recovered: 02Updated at : 10:00 pm, 9th May.#TripuraCovid19Count
117 coronavirus patients were found positive till Friday from 138 battalion and 86 battalion alone while a civilian truck driver was confirmed to be carrying the virus yesterday as well.
Law Minister Ratan Lal Nath told reporters this evening that even as the MoHFW has instructed all states to mandate corona testing only for severe patients before discharging them, those in mild and very mild category would not need to undergo the test.
In Tripura, only two out of all the active cases are symptomatic and the rest are asymptomatic.
Congress leader Rahul Gandhi Saturday said that the PM-CARES fun has received huge contributions from PSUs & major public utilities like the Railways, adding that it is "important to ensure that the fund is audited" and that "record of money received and spent is available to the public".
The #PmCares fund has received huge contributions from PSUs & major public utilities like the Railways. It’s important that PM ensures the fund is audited & that the record of money received and spent is available to the public.
Noida on Saturday reported its second Covid-19 related death after a 62-year-old man died due to a cardio-respiratory attack. Earlier, a 60-year-old man had died on Friday after he succumbed to a cardiac arrest. Till Friday, the district had reported 216 positive cases.
Noida reports 2nd COVId death in 24 hours after a 62-year-old man died due to cardio-respiratory attack. Earlier a 60-year-old Covid positiv e man, hailing from Sector 22, succumbed to the infection. District reported 216 cases so far.#Covid_19 @IndianExpress
The Indian Council of Medical Research in a statement Saturday announced its partnership with Bharat Biotech International Limited to develop a fully indigenous vaccine for COVID-19. The vaccine will be developed using virus strain isolated at ICMR's National Institute of Virology, Pune, the body said in a statement.
After a long time, an update from ?@ICMRDELHI?. ICMR & Bharat Biotech International Limited (BBIL) have partnered to develop a fully indigenous vaccine for COVID-19 using the virus strain isolated at ICMR’s National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune ?@IndianExpress? pic.twitter.com/z71jU9mZPw
Here are the top developments of the day: 
*With India entering its 46th day of the lockdown, Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan on Saturday said the testing capacity for COVID-19 has been scaled up to around 95,000 tests per day and a total of 15,25,631 tests had been conducted so far across 332 government and 121 private laboratories.
*Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan said the testing capacity for Covid-19 across the country has been scaled up to around 95,000 tests per day.
*Several migrant workers from Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Bihar and Odisha working at Surat’s Hazira industrial belt came on to the streets in Mora village, demanding that they are sent back to their home states, and clashed with the police.
*Union Home Minister Amit Shah in a letter to West Bengal CM Mamta Banerjee has said that the state government is creating further hardships for migrants by not allowing trains with migrant workers to reach the state.
*Two Indians repatriated from the Gulf as part of ‘Vande Bharat Mission’ to bring home Indians stranded abroad have tested positive for the novel coronavirus. The two new patients, flown from Dubai and Abu Dhabi to Kozhikode and Kochi respectively, were among the 363 who landed in Kerala on special flights Thursday.
*Days after announcing a number of measures to relax the lockdown norms for industries, Tamil Nadu on Saturday came out with many more decisions to relax certain lockdown measures in non-containment areas in the state. From May 11 all private establishments can function with 33 per cent strength between 10:30 am and 6 pm in Greater Chennai Police limits and 10 am to 7 pm in the rest of the state.
*The Assam government has decided to increase the excise duty on Indian Made Foreign Liquor (IMFL) by 25 per cent.
*In a decision that will cut down India’s need for Covid-19 testing kits, the Ministry of Health in a late-night direction on Friday, said that mild and moderate cases do not need to be tested prior to discharge. As per the earlier policy, patients had to test negative twice prior to discharge.
The Godhra police on Saturday booked 11 persons, including a Covid-19 recovered man, and another group of about 50 persons for allegedly gathering to celebrate his return from the hospital.
Two jawans of the Railway Protection Force (RPF) have tested positive for the novel coronavirus in Ludhiana. They had come from Delhi for duty, and were in quarantine since May 7.
#Punjab: Two jawans of Railway Protection Force (RPF) test positive for coronavirus in Ludhiana. They had come from Delhi for duty. Were in quarantine since May 7, says ASC RPF Ferozepur div @IndianExpress @iepunjab
Days after announcing a number of measures to relax the lockdown norms for industries, Tamil Nadu on Saturday came out with many more decisions to relax certain lockdown measures in non-containment areas in the state. Relaxations that come in effect from May 11 said all private establishments can function with 33% strength between 10:30 am and 6 pm in Greater Chennai Police limits and 10 am and 7 pm in the rest of the state.
A recent announcement by the University of Oxford that researchers there had started testing a vaccine against the novel coronavirus disease (Covid-19) has raised hopes. Over the last few weeks, there have also been somewhat conflicting reports about the performance of a drug candidate, remdesivir, while Israel has announced a breakthrough in another possible line of treatment, that with antibodies.
Click here to read about the vaccine candidates around the world, including the one announced by the University of Oxford.
On May 1, 2020, the first train carrying migrant labourers set off from Lingampally in Telangana for Hatia in Jharkhand with necessary precautions implemented, including social distancing at the station. The government has estimated that it would need to run at least 500 trains to help migrants across the country return to their home states. Nine days on and dozens of trains later, however, some workers are still choosing to go home on foot.



Click here to see more pictures.
The West Bengal government is arranging special trains to bring back over 30,000 residents of the state stranded in Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Karnataka and Punjab due to the ongoing lockdown, a senior official told PTI Saturday. The stranded people are mostly migrant workers, patients and their attendants, students, pilgrims and tourists from West Bengal, he said.
This comes hours after Union Home Minister Amit Shah Saturday accused the Mamata Banerjee-led West Bengal government of not allowing trains with migrant workers to reach the state. 
Referring to the ‘Shramik Special’ trains that are being operated by the Centre to facilitate transport of migrant workers from different parts of the country to various destinations, Shah said in the letter that the Centre has facilitated more than two lakh migrants workers to reach home
 Migrant labourers stand in queue to undergo medical tests before boarding Shramik Special trains to return to their home states, on Friday(Express Photo: Gurmeet Singh)
The death of 16 migrant labourers who were mowed down by an empty freight train in Maharashtra’s Aurangabad district brought the focus back to the plight of migrant workers, rendered unemployed and homeless, since a nationwide lockdown was announced to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus.
The workers, who were walking to Bhusawal from Jalna to board a “Shramik Special” train to return to Madhya Pradesh, were sleeping on the railway line when the mishap occurred between Badnapur and Karmad stations in Nanded Division.
The empty train was heading from Cherlapally Station near Hyderabad to Panewadi Station near Manmad in Nashik. The motormen tried to bring the train to a halt but failed to do so, an official said.
 The move comes almost three weeks after the ICMR on April 13 had issued a tender asking Central PSUs to act as Procurement Agency for essential supplies related to the COVID19 testing
In another news, public sector unit HLL Infra Tech Services Limited under the Ministry of Health of Family Welfare on Friday began issuing tenders on behalf of Indian Council of Medical Research for the supply of testing kits, in a major shift with respect to the procurement of testing kits in India for COVID19.
The move comes almost three weeks after the ICMR on April 13 had issued a tender asking Central PSUs to act as Procurement Agency for essential supplies related to the COVID19 testing. The April 13 decision of the ICMR had come after the agency has come under the scanner over the delay in the procurement of testing kits.
On Friday, Procurement & Consultancy Services Division of HITES, on behalf of ICMR - invited an e-tender for three medical types of equipment: RT-PCR kits, RNA extraction kits, and Viral Media Transport. The tender has been issued for a supply of 29,00,000 RT-PCR kits, 33,00,000 RNA extraction kits, and 40,00,000 Viral Media Transport.
The decision to rope in a specialised PSU for procurement of testing kits also comes in the backdrop of the ICMR increasing the testing capacity to 1 lakh tests per day by the end of June.
