COVID-19 latest India update, April 16: 826 cases reported in 24 hours; Maharashtra COVID-19 patient count stands at 3,202
Coronavirus India Updates: The number of coronavirus cases in India crossed 12,000 to stand at 12,759 while the death toll rose to 420 on Thursday, the Union Health Ministry announced. As many as 1,515 people have been discharged and one has migrated, it added. The total number of cases include 76 foreign nationals. A total of 826 cases were reported in the last 24 hours, the ministry said. Of the total 420 deaths, Maharashtra tops the tally with 187 fatalities, followed by Madhya Pradesh at 53, Gujarat at 36, Delhi at 32 and Telengana at 18.
Lav Agarwal, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Affairs, said the fatality rate of India is 3.3% while that of recovery stood at 12.02%. Districts of Mahe, Patna, Nadia, Pratapgarh, Porbandar, South Goa, Pauri Gadwal, Pilibhit, Rajauri, Vilaspur Durg, Rajnandgaon have completed 28 days without case, he added.
Here is a look at some of the latest coronavirus updates from across India:
Gujarat government imposed a six-day curfew in five locations at Surat on Thursday to stop the rapid spread of COVID-19, the state government officials said. This is the second city in Gujarat, after Ahmedabad, where government has imposed curfew to contain the disease. “In order to control the rapidly rising cases in certain areas of Surat, the government has decided to impose curfew from midnight today to 6 am on April 22 in five areas that fall under the jurisdiction of police stations Salabatpura, Mahedharpura, Lalgate, Athwalines and Kamrunagar police chowky area of Limbayat,” said Ashwini Kumar, secretary to chief minister Vijay Rupani.
A total of 286 new COVID-19 cases were reported in Maharashtra on Thursday, taking the count beyond the 3,200 mark. Seven more people succumbed to the disease, a state health official told PTI. With this, the positive cases in the state stands at 3,202, while the death toll is now 194, he added.
Meanwhile, five COVID-19 patients were discharged after they recovered from the disease, taking the tally of cured cases to 300. The state has so far carried out 56,673 tests for COVID-19 in laboratories, the official said.
China on Thursday dispatched 6,50,000 coronavirus medical kits to India to help fight pandemic, Indian Ambassador to Beijing Vikram Misri said. To meet its requirement of 15 million personal protection equipment (PPEs), which includes gowns, masks, gloves and goggles, India has reached out to China and has placed orders. New Delhi is also in the process of procuring 1.5 million rapid testing kits from China, some of which have already been delivered.
“#IndiaFightsCoronavirus A total of 6,50,000 kits, including Rapid Antibody Tests and RNA Extraction Kits have been dispatched early today from Guangzhou Airport to #India,” Misri tweeted on Thursday.
Earlier, two major consignments of medical kits were reported to have been sent to New Delhi as part of efforts to step up testing, specially in the hotspot zones.
At least 25 fresh cases of Covid-19 were reported in Rajasthan on Thursday, taking the state’s tally to 1,101, officials said. According to PTI, of the fresh cases, 11 are from Tonk, 10 from Jodhpur, 2 from Jhunjhunu and one each from Bikaner and Ajmer.
A total of 37,860 samples have been collected in the state so far. At least 1,101 were positive and 31,902 were negative while 4,857 samples are under processing. As many as 157 patients have been cured so far and 82 of them discharged, the news agency added.
A 66-year old man in Bengaluru became the thirteenth Covid-19-related fatality in Karnataka, Health Department officials said on Thursday. The elderly patient passed away at Victorial Hospital on April 15.
“He was referred from a private hospital and was admitted in Victoria Hospital and was on ventilator support since April 10,” officials said.
A 80-year old woman in Belagavi and a 65-year old man from Chikkaballapura had also died on Wednesday.
The total number of coronavirus cases in Andhra Pradesh rose to 534 on Thursday after nine more people tested positive for the infection overnight. Twenty patients have been discharged so far while 14 others have died.
With 122 cases, Guntur district tops the state chart while Kurnool is close behind with 113 cases. With the maximum number of Tablighi Jamaat attendees and their contacts, these two districts are the major hotbeds of coronavirus in the state.
A huge street painting of #coronavirus in #Jagitial town of #Telangana gives #StayHome message. #Covid_19 #CoronaUpdatesInIndia #lockdown #LockdownExtended @Collector_JGTL #ptcstory @COVIDNewsByMIB @MIB_India @DrTamilisaiGuv pic.twitter.com/PiTLVIpIVm
— AIR News Hyderabad (@airnews_hyd) April 16, 2020
After spreading awareness about coronavirus by singing songs out on streets, Goa Police have compiled a video, featuring local artists, to highlight the importance of staying indoors to remain safe from the disease.
Goa Inspector General of Police Jaspal Singh on Wednesday released the video, titled ‘Gharantuch tum rav’ (you stay indoors), on various social media platforms. The song shown in the video has been written and composed by Deputy Superintendent of Police Edwin Colaco.
https://t.co/SNNHXrUHfU Tum Rav – A video song by DySP Edwin Colaco on why we need to #StayHomeStaySafe even if we get #bored. This is a crucial time in #GoaFightsCOVID19. Let’s look at it as just a few more days! @goacm @PIB_Panaji @dip_goa @goanewshub @PrimeTVGoa @bigfmindia
— DGP_Goa (@DGP_Goa) April 15, 2020
“The video was shot in a house during the lockdown period, but the crew members ensured that guidelines of the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare were not violated, Colaco told PTI.
A coronavirus patient from Sundergarh district in Odisha has recovered and will soon be discharged from the hospital, the state government said on Thursday.
The Health and Family Welfare Department said that with this recovery, the total number of persons cured in the state is 19. The rate of recovery from the disease in Odisha remains at 30 per cent, an official said.
The International Monetary Fund on Wednesday said that it supports India’s proactive decision of a imposing a nationwide lockdown in its fight against coronavirus.
“India entered the pandemic turmoil in the midst of a credit crunch-induced slowdown and its recovery prospect becomes more uncertain,” Chang Yong Rhee, the Director of the IMF’s Asia and Pacific Department, told reporters.
For the first time since the #GreatDepression both advanced economies and emerging market and developing economies are in recession” said @GitaGopinah at the release of the latest World Economic Outlook #WEO https://t.co/93xXDRsg3B pic.twitter.com/3PmqaVCboH
— IMF (@IMFNews) April 14, 2020
“Despite the economic slowdown, the government implemented a nationwide lockdown and we support India’s proactive decision,” Rhee said.
A day earlier, the IMF in its World Economic Outlook had forecast India’s growth rate to be 1.9 per cent in 2020.
Three more patients succumbed to coronavirus in Gujarat in the last 12 hours, taking the death toll in the state to 36, an official said on Thursday.
The fresh deaths were reported from Kutch, Ahmedabad and Botad districts, state principal secretary (health) Jayanti Ravi said.
A 62-year-old patient undergoing treatment at a hospital died in Kutch, while an 80-year-old man succumbed in Botad. Besides, a 60-year-old woman died due to the disease at SVP Hospital in Ahmedabad, the official added.
Don’t miss these articles on Coronavirus from the Explained section:
‣ How coronavirus attacks, step by step
‣ Mask or no mask? Why the guidance has been shifting
‣ Besides a face cover, should I wear gloves when I go outdoors?
‣ How the Agra, Bhilwara and Pathanamthitta Covid-19 containment models differ
‣ Can coronavirus damage your brain?
