Coronavirus India HIGHLIGHTS: With 12,881 fresh cases, tally rises to 366,946
Coronavirus India News Live Updates: With 12,881 fresh cases, the coronavirus tally in India rose to 366,946 on Thursday, even as Prime Minister Narendra Modi ruled out the possibility of another round of lockdown. On Wednesday, Modi told states that “unlock, unlock, unlock” should be the way forward as they fight to control the pandemic and ramp up healthcare facilities.
Promising findings from the United Kingdom’s RECOVERY clinical trial have brought India’s anti-inflammatory steroid dexamethasone market under the spotlight. While medical experts here are still studying the findings to understand how beneficial it may be as part of India’s treatment protocol for Covid-19 patients, industry executives expect global demand for the drug to shoot up like in the case of hydroxychloroquine earlier.
Globally, as many as 8,331,135 people have been infected while 448,504 have lost their lives. President Donald Trump has signed a legislation that seeks to punish China for its crackdown on Uighurs and other ethnic minorities. Beijing, on the other hand, ramped up medical testing and cancelled hundreds of flights after over 160 fresh cases were reported in the last few days.

With 12,881 fresh cases, the coronavirus tally in India rose to 366,946 on Thursday.
China has reported 28 new confirmed coronavirus cases, including 24 in Beijing, taking the total number of infections in the last few days to 161 as the capital city ramped up testing 3.56 lakh residents and cancelling hundreds of flights to stem the spread of the virus, the health authorities said on Thursday. China's National Health Commission (NHC) said that it received reports of 28 new confirmed Covid-19 cases in the country on Wednesday. Of the domestically transmitted cases, 21 cases were reported in Beijing, two in Hebei Province, and one in Tianjin Municipality, the NHC said in its daily report. No deaths related to the disease were reported on Wednesday, according to the commission.
Gujarat crossed 25,000 coronavirus cases on Wednesday as another 520 persons tested positive, including 330 from Ahmedabad among whom is BJP councillor from Vejalpur ward in Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation. Active cases in the state crossed 6,000 on Wednesday. More than two-thirds of these active cases are in Ahmedabad, even though the total tests in Ahmedabad comprise only a third of the state’s total tests. With more than 5,800 samples taken in a 24-hour cycle, the highest till date, Gujarat as of Wednesday crossed three lakh samples. The overall positive test rate appears to have moved higher marginally, from 8.2 percent on June 15 to nearly 8.3 percent as of June 17. 
Gujarat crossed 25,000 coronavirus cases on Wednesday as another 520 persons tested positive, including 330 from Ahmedabad among whom is BJP councillor from Vejalpur ward in Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC).
Active cases in the state crossed 6,000 on Wednesday. More than two-thirds of these active cases are in Ahmedabad, even though the total tests in Ahmedabad comprise only a third of the state’s total tests.
With more than 5,800 samples taken in a 24-hour cycle, the highest till date, Gujarat as of Wednesday crossed three lakh samples. The overall positive test rate appears to have moved higher marginally, from 8.2 percent on June 15 to nearly 8.3 percent as of June 17.
Despite protests from NRIs and Opposition parties, the Kerala government on Wednesday reiterated that a Covid-19 negative certificate is mandatory to board special flights to the state from West Asia. Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan said those flying back home on chartered or Vande Bharat mission flights must take a Covid-19 test. “Infected and non-infected persons cannot be brought back by the same flight. The Union government should make facilities for Covid-19 testing in airports. There should be facilities for free tests for the economically backward expatriates. The government wants everyone coming to the state to take the test. That should not be construed as the government’s reluctance to receive the pravasis,’’ he told the media.
Promising findings from the United Kingdom’s RECOVERY clinical trial have brought India’s anti-inflammatory steroid dexamethasone market under the spotlight. While medical experts here are still studying the findings to understand how beneficial it may be as part of India’s treatment protocol for COVID-19 patients, industry executives expect global demand for the drug to shoot up like in the case of hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) earlier. The “first drug to be shown to improve survival”, dexamethasone reduces death by up to a third in COVID-19 patients on ventilator support, and by a fifth in patients receiving only oxygen, researchers leading the trial had announced.
A day after the data reconciliation process added 1,328 deaths to the tally of Covid-19 deaths in the state, Maharashtra on Wednesday reported 114 deaths, taking the overall count to 5,651.
The state also saw 3,307 new cases, taking the total patient count to 1,16,752. Of the 114 deaths, 77 were reported in Mumbai alone. The city reported 1,359 new cases, with its overall figure now at 61, 587. It has recorded 3,244 deaths so far. There are only 51,921 active cases in Maharashtra as of now.
Health Minister Rajesh Tope, meanwhile, asked hospitals to strictly follow the admission protocol and not admit asymptomatic patients in order to keep intensive care beds free for critical patients. Mumbai is reeling under a shortage of ICUs – of the 1,197 under its disposal, only 37 were available as on Tuesday night.
The BJP and the MNS on Wednesday opposed the BMC’s decision to bar private laboratories from informing Covid-19 positive patients about their test results. The two parties claimed the decision stemmed from the desire to suppress actual case numbers in the city.
Former BJP MP Kirit Somaiya on Wednesday wrote to Municipal Commissioner Iqbal Singh Chahal, seeking withdrawal of the circular. Somaiya alleged that the civic body’s move could affect patients as with these new rules, they have to wait longer to get treated.
“Wrote to BMC Commissioner to withdraw 13 June Absurd circular, prohibiting Private Laboratory to give Corona Positive Reports directly to the Persons/Family but to submit to BMC only. LOGIC?? Negative reports be given to the Persons! The person who required urgent information/Treatment is asked to wait,” tweeted Somaiya.
A second death audit report, analysing 545 deaths of Mumbai Metropolitan Region, has found that fatalities among Covid-19 patients in the age group of 41-50 increased in the period between April 23 to May 10, as compared to deaths until April 23.
From the first Covid-19 death on March 17 until April 23, only 28 of the total 181 deaths were in the age group of 41-50 years. In the subsequent period, from April 23 to May 10, mortality in the age bracket rose to 76 of the total 364 deaths — an increase of five percentage points from 15 per cent to 20 per cent of the total deaths.
The second death audit report has analysed all the 545 deaths reported from the first fatality until May 10. While the government has continued to deny community transmission, the death audit report has indicated otherwise.
Irregular supply of the expensive Tocilizumab drug, an immunosuppressant used in the treatment of severely ill Covid-19 patients, has forced the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) hospitals to ask several patients to procure the medicine for their own treatment in the last few days.
The BMC, which procures Tocilizumab from pharmaceutical company Cipla, each dosage costing between Rs 30,000-40,000, has been treating Covid-19 patients with their own supplies of the drug free-of-cost. With a spike in the number of Covid-19 patients, the civic-run hospitals, however, have been reporting problems with the supply of the drug.
A Food and Drug Administration (FDA) staffer’s family and FDA officials recently had to run pillar to post to purchase 400 mg of Tocilizumab after the Nair hospital said they have run out of stock. The staffer, however, died the day the drug was administered. READ MORE
With residents violating the norms of social distancing and use of masks and Mayor Murlidhar Mohol raising an alarm over the possible increase in Covid-19 cases, the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) on Wednesday decided to shut civic gardens and parks for public once again.
On June 3, the PMC had reopened the civic gardens and parks for public strictly for walking and jogging. The civic body had urged residents to follow social distancing and use masks. It had opened 33 of the total 204 gardens and parks outside containment zones.
On Wednesday, PMC garden superintendent Ashok Ghorpade said the mayor has urged the civic administration to keep the gardens and parks closed as there was a danger of increase in novel coronavirus infection due to crowding and use of benches and exercise equipments at the open gymnasium.
Maharashtra government on Wednesday transferred Jalgaon Collector Dr Avinash Dhakne a week after the body of an 82-year-old Covid-19 patient was found inside the toilet at the Jalgaon Civil Hopsital. The body had gone unnoticed for eight days and the hospital authorities had reported the patient missing.
The state government had taken serious note of the incident and had suspended five senior doctors in the hospital, including Dean Dr B S Khaire, Superintendent Dr Kiran Patil, Assistant Professor Dr Suyog Chaudhary, an on-duty resident doctor and casualty officer.
Dhakne, who has not got a new posting, will be replaced by Abhijit Raut. He was posted as CEO of Sangli Zilla Parishad.
Social distancing measures in place at the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus in Mumbai. Mumbai local trains resumed operations on  June 15, only for essential workers. The train service had been shut since March 23.  

Brave New World! Social distancing enforced inside Mumbai's biggest rail terminus at Mumbai CSMT. Only essential workers allowed. Video taken at 5:45pm this evening. pic.twitter.com/ryjrk1tKzL
After reporting four new cases on Wednesday, Arunachal Pradesh’s total tally of COVID-19 cases crossed 100. The four cases have been reported from the districts of Lower Siang, Lower Dibang Valley, Namsai and Tirap. As per a release by the Directorate of Health Services, the infections have been found in people who have recently come to the state, are asymptomatic and have been shifted to Covid Care Centres. The state currently has 93 active cases.
In the Pune Municipal Corporation's new list of containment zones, which has more zones, 73 compared to the 66 earlier, but covers a smaller area, the maximum number of such zones are under the Wanwadi-Ramtekdi ward office.
Right now, the city has 73 containment zones which cover 6.645 sq km. These areas have been sealed off and there are severe restictions on movement of local residents.
The Wanwadi-Ramtekdi and Bibewadi ward offices earlier had 10 containment zones each but as per the revised list, Wanwadi-Ramtkedi ward office area has 11 and Bibewadi has only seven now. The biggest containment zone, spanning an area of 1.354 sq km, is also in Wanwadi-Ramtekdi area.
Warje-Karvenagar and Kondhwa-Yeolewadi ward offices have only one containment zone each, of 0.013 sq km and 0.079 sq km respectively.
Over 2400 fresh cases have been reported in Delhi today.
Delhi reports 2414 new cases of #COVID19 and 67 deaths in the last 24 hours. Total number of cases recorded at 47102. Death toll at 1904@IndianExpress
Beijing moved on a war footing on Wednesday, cancelling hundreds of domestic flights, testing 3.56 lakh residents, suspending sports events and closing certain gyms as China's capital city reported 31 new COVID-19 cases, pushing the tally to 137.
Two airports in Beijing have cancelled 1,255 domestic flights, nearly 70 per cent of the scheduled trips, the official media reported. Beijing currently does not operate international flights. The national railway operator will allow passengers, who had booked train tickets in and out of Beijing as of Tuesday, to refund tickets without any extra charges. An epidemic-control official in Beijing said on Wednesday that the capital has tested about 3.56 lakh residents since Saturday, after more than 100 locally-transmitted COVID-19 cases were spotted in the city.
After decision by Home Minister Amit Shah,16618 samples were collected in Delhi on June 15-16 for COVID-19 testing. Until now 4000-4500 samples were being tested daily 

The number of active Containment Zones in Bengaluru rises to 208. However, the list of containment zones finds no place in today's BBMP War Room's COVID19 bulletin (June 17).
#COVID19: Total cases in #Bengaluru so far rises to 827. 55 fresh cases and 5 deaths were confirmed in the city today. Total active cases: 413 (June 17). Discharges so far: 370. Deaths: 43. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/wTKXBIe99N
Hours after his first test results came out to be negative, Delhi Health Minister Satyendar Jain tested positive for coronavirus after his second tests were out, the Office of Delhi Health Minister announced. 
 Coronavirus India News Live Updates: Delhi and Tamil Nadu have been reporting almost 2,000 new cases each for the last few days now, while Maharashtra has now begun to report between 3,000 and 3,500 cases every day.
While the dominance of Maharashtra in the country-wide spread of the Covid-19 disease has weakened in the last few weeks, that of Tamil Nadu and Delhi has increased. That, in effect, has meant that the contribution of these three states in the national caseload has remained almost constant in the last one month, between 56 and 58 per cent.
Delhi and Tamil Nadu have been reporting almost 2,000 new cases each for the last few days now, while Maharashtra has now begun to report between 3,000 and 3,500 cases every day.
In the top ten states with maximum caseloads, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh have been losing their places, reporting fewer number of new cases every day, while Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have been climbing up. Karnataka and Haryana are the new entrants in the top ten list, while Bihar and Andhra Pradesh have been edged out.
Meanwhile, the Indian Railways on Monday said it had ferried 60 lakh migrant workers home since May 1 through Shramik Special trains but managed to recover only 15 per cent of operational cost.
Railway Board Chairman VK Yadav said the average fare per person on Shramik Special trains was Rs 600 and the national transporter had run 4,450 Shramik trains so far. The Railways generated a revenue of around Rs 360 crore.
In another news, the US Food and Drug Administration is revoking its emergency authorization for malaria drugs promoted by President Donald Trump for treating COVID-19 amid growing evidence they don’t work and could cause deadly side effects.
