Mann Ki Baat HIGHLIGHTS: Think of Covid warriors when you feel tired of wearing mask, says PM Modi
PM Narendra Modi Mann Ki Baat HIGHLIGHTS: Prime Minister Narendra Modi began his address to nation by remembering the jawans who laid down their lives during the 1999 Kargil War. He also spoke about how Covid is spreading faster and that its threat is high as ever. PM Modi said, “COVID-19 recovery rate in our country is better than others. Our fatality rate is much less than other countries. We were able to save the lives of lakhs of people, but the threat of coronavirus is not over yet. It is spreading fast in many areas, we need to remain vigilant.”
Earlier, on July 11, PM Modi had also invited people to share “inspiring anecdotes” about the collective efforts made by people to bring positive changes. He tweeted, “I am sure you would be aware of inspiring anecdotes of how collective efforts have brought about positive changes. You would surely know of initiatives that have transformed many lives. Please share them for this month`s #MannKiBaat, which will take place on the 26th!”
In his last Mann Ki Baat address on June 28, Prime Minister Narendra Modi paid tributes to the 20 Indian soldiers who had died in the violent clash with Chinese troops on June 15 in Galwan Valley, and asserted that India had given a befitting reply to those who cast an evil eye on its territory.
Modi had said: “Those who cast an evil eye on Indian soil in Ladakh have got a befitting response. India honours the spirit of friendship… she is also capable of giving an appropriate response to any adversary, without shying away. Our brave soldiers have proven that they will not let anyone cast an evil eye on the glory and honour of Mother India.”

Talking about Ladakh and Kutch, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said the areas had employed novel methods amid the ongoing crisis, and praised them.
Ladakh and Kutch are making commendable efforts towards building an Aatmanirbhar Bharat. #MannKiBaat pic.twitter.com/aC5HZj5cAg
While addressing the nation during his monthly radio show Mann ki Baat, PM Modi said: "There was a time when whether in sports or other sectors, most people were either from big cities or famous families or well-known schools/colleges. Now, it is different. Youth from villages, small towns and ordinary families are coming forward."
"In many parts of Bihar and Assam, floods have created many problems. Governments, NDRF and state disaster management teams and self held groups are working together in relief and rescue work" said PM Modi.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi says that National Handloom Day is approaching, and that local ventures, handicrafts, handlooms and artisans should be supported. August 7 was chosen as the National Handloom Day to commemorate the Swadeshi Movement which was launched in 1905.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi says as Rakshabandhan approaches, people are linking it to "vocal and local", and this was correct as it was a chance to support local businesses. He added that "The joy of celebrating festival increases when it helps expand the business of people in our society, in our neighbourhood & make it a joyous festival for them too".
"Whenever you feel like taking off your masks, think of frontline soldiers. Villages have been making extraordinary efforts against Covid-19," Prime Minister Narendra Modi said, while shedding light on the various administrative and innovative efforts being undertaken in villages. "With a positive approach, a disaster can be turned around into opportunity," PM Modi added.
While addressing the nation during his monthly radio show Mann ki Baat, Modi said: 'During COVID19, Balbir Kaur, sarpanch of Trewa in Jammu, built a 30-bed quarantine bed in her panchayat. Jaituna Begum of Chountliwar in Ganderbal resolved that her panchayat will fight COVID19 & also create employment opportunities.'
"Today, COVID19 recovery rate in our country is better than others. Our fatality rate is much less than most of the other countries. We managed to save the lives of lakhs of people, but the threat of coronavirus is not over yet. It is spreading fast many areas, we need to remain vigilant", said PM Modi.
"Pakistan undertook this misadventure with sinister plans to capture India's land and to divert attention from its internal conflicts", said PM Modi during Mann ki Baat on KargilVijayDiwas
"21 yrs ago on this our army won the Kargil war. India was then trying to have cordial relations with Pakistan but is said that it is in the nature of the wicked to have enmity with everyone for no reason", PM Modi said during Mann ki Baat.
In his monthly radio programme Mann Ki Baat, PM Narendra Modi Sunday paid tributes to armed forces to mark the 21st anniversary of India's victory over Pakistan in the Kargil war, saying their valour continues to inspire generations. The Kargil war was declared over on July 26, 1999, after Indian soldiers pushed back Pakistani troops, a bulk of them drawn from the neighbouring country's Northern Light Infantry, from the captured peaks in Kargil.
Tune in to this month’s #MannKiBaat. https://t.co/0PPisEWaHG
Earlier, on July 11, PM Modi had also invited people to share “inspiring anecdotes” about the collective efforts made by people to bring positive changes. He tweeted, “I am sure you would be aware of inspiring anecdotes of how collective efforts have brought about positive changes. You would surely know of initiatives that have transformed many lives. Please share them for this month`s #MannKiBaat, which will take place on the 26th!"
I am sure you would be aware of inspiring anecdotes of how collective efforts have brought about positive changes. You would surely know of initiatives that have transformed many lives. Please share them for this month’s #MannKiBaat, which will take place on the 26th!
Prime Minister Narendra Modi will address the nation at 11 am today via his monthly radio programme Mann ki Baat. Prime Minister Narendra Modi is expected to pay his tributes to the jawans killed in action on the 21st anniversary of India’s victory in Kargil war. Follow our blog for all the latest updates.
Tune in to PM Shri @narendramodi's #MannKiBaat program at 11 am on 26 July 2020.Listen LIVE at• https://t.co/vpP0MI6iTu• https://t.co/KrGm5hWgwn• https://t.co/lcXkSnweeN• https://t.co/jtwD1yPhm4 pic.twitter.com/2WifTCM50K
 Prime Minister Narendra Modi during his monthly address to the nation.
