Coronavirus May 2 Highlights: Ahmedabad records highest one-day toll at 20; India counts 2,411 cases in 24 hrs
Coronavirus LIVE updates: Ahmedabad Saturday reported 20 coronavirus deaths — highest one-day count so far — taking the death toll in the district to 184, news agency PTI reported. The total number of cases in the district also jumped to 3,543 with 250 fresh cases being detected. With 4,721 confirmed cases and 236 deaths, Gujarat is trailing just behind Maharashtra, which has more than 11,000 cases and 485 deaths. In the last 24 hours, the number of coronavirus cases in India has risen by 2,411, taking the country’s tally to 37,776 cases, including 1,223 deaths and 10,017 recoveries.
Retired Chief Justice of Chhatisgarh High Court and Lokpal member Ajay Kumar Tripathi (62) passed away at AIIMS trauma centre due to novel coronavirus Saturday. He was admitted to the hospital last month after having tested positive for Covid-19. Meanwhile, Prime Minister Narendra Modi held meetings with Home Minister Amit Shah and Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman to discuss a second stimulus package for sectors adversely affected by the nationwide lockdown, news agency PTI reported.
A day after ‘Shramik Special’ trains began ferrying migrants back to their homes, a train with 847 migrant workers left for Lucknow from Nashik this morning. Kerala is scheduled to run two trains carrying migrants to Jharkhand while Gujarat would send the workers home in two more trains — one from Ahmedabad to Uttar Pradesh and the other from Surat to Odisha. (Track India’s state-wise cases, deaths and recoveries here) 
On the global front, the coronavirus has claimed over 238,000 lives and infected over 3.3 million people, according to a tally by John Hopkins University. The United States continues to be the worst-hit, with over 10,00,000 cases and over 64,000 deaths.

Pakistan registered its highest single day increase in the coronavirus cases with 1,297 new infections, taking the total number to 18,114, officials said on Saturday. The death toll due to the viral infection jumped to 417 with 32 fatalities recorded in the last 24 hours, the Ministry of National Health Services said.
As many as 4,715 patients have been recovered, it said. A record number of 1,297 new COVID-19 patients were added in a single day on Friday, the ministry said.
The railways reiterated on Saturday night that it was ferrying only those authorised by state governments in its special trains for people stranded during the lockdown, following reports of unauthorised travel and crowding at some stations.
In a late night statement, the national transporter said, "Railways only accepting passengers, brought and facilitated by state governments. No other group of traveller or individual are to come to station." "Some special trains being run only on state governments' requests. All other passenger and suburban train services remain suspended," it said.
The railways also said that no tickets are being sold at any station, advising people not to converge at any rail station. India is under a nationwide lockdown to check the spread of the novel coronavirus, with a ban on rail, air and road traffic.
Ahmedabad Saturday reported 20 coronavirus deaths — highest one-day count so far — taking the death toll in the district to 184, news agency PTI reported. The total number of cases in the district also jumped to 3,543 with 250 fresh cases being detected. With 4,721 confirmed cases and 236 deaths, Gujarat is trailing just behind Maharashtra, which has more than 11,000 cases and 485 deaths.
In West Bengal, fifteen people have died due to COVID-19 in the last 48 hours, taking the toll to 48, according to a bulletin issued by the state health department on Saturday. It said 127 new cases of Covid-19 were reported from different parts of the state on these two days, as the new number of active cases rose to 624. The government did not issue any bulletin on the COVID-19 status on Friday.
Retired Chief Justice of Chhatisgarh High Court and Lokpal member Ajay Kumar Tripathi passed away at AIIMS trauma centre due to novel coronavirus Saturday. He was admitted to the hospital last month after having tested positive for Covid-19. On Saturday, he suffered a sudden cardiac arrest and succumbed to the month-long illness.

Six more people tested positive for coronavirus in Jhajjar Saturday. Of them, five people work in the vegetable market in Bahadurgarh, and one is a staff nurse at a COVID hospital in Delhi and resides in Bahadurgarh. Total cases in the district now 40.
Gujarat's Mahisagar reported six new COVID-19 cases on Saturday taking the district total to 23. Of them, four were from Balasinor and two from Kadana. The patients include a doctor and two staff workers of the Balasinor COVID hospital. Six people were also discharged.
One of the 106 men accused in the Palghar mob lynching case tested positive for coronavirus late on Friday. The district administration said the man was asymptomatic, but was hospitalised and kept in isolation on Saturday morning. The man who tested positive on Friday is 55 years old, and was kept among a group of 20 other suspects in a lock-up in Wada. “According to the standard operating procedure now in place, all suspects being taken into custody are tested for coronavirus. His report was inconclusive earlier, and on retesting, he tested positive this morning.
On the night of April 16, a mob of close to 400 men gathered outside Gadchinchle village on the border of Dahanu taluka and Dadra and Nagar Haveli. Fuelled by rumours of gangs of thieves and organ harvesters roaming the area at night, the mob stopped a van and fatally assaulted its occupants, two sadhus and the driver. Read more here

The Himachal Pradesh Cabinet on Saturday announced a new scheme, Mukhya Mantri Shahari Rojgar Guarantee Yojana, to provide 120 days of assured employment to the state’s urban population. The government also said that it will provide Rs. 2,000 each to the state’s one lakh registered workers to help them tide over the economic crisis triggered by the pandemic. Read more here

Minister of law, communications, electronics and information technology, Ravi Shankar Prasad hit back at Congress leader who had raised data secuity concerns over the Arogya Setu App. Referring the App as "a powerful companion which protects people", Prasad said, "Those who indulged in surveillance all their lives, won’t know how tech can be leveraged for good!"
Daily a new lie. Aarogya Setu is a powerful companion which protects people. It has a robust data security architecture. Those who indulged in surveillance all their lives, won’t know how tech can be leveraged for good! https://t.co/t8ThXmddcS
Kerala turned a new corner Saturday in it's fight against Covid-19 with the number of active cases dipping below 100 for the first time in over a month. The state reported just two new cases, one of which one was found in Wayanad district which was earlier slotted in the green zone. Following the fresh case, the district was shifted to orange zone where there are fewer lockdown relaxations compared to the green zone.
However, Sundays should be observed with complete shutdown even in green zones with people advised to remain at home. Private establishments and shops must remain closed. Though the Centre allowed the opening of liquor retail shops in green zones with adequate security measures, the state government has resisted the move fearing huge crowds after a long period of closure. However, the CM said it's a temporary measure which will be lifted soon. Barber shops, beauty parlours, spas, gyms, movie theatres, parks and religious places will remain closed. Barring hotspots, the public can use their private vehicles for essential travel. On two-wheelers, pillion riders will not be allowed. In four-wheelers, two people can travel excluding the driver. In green zones, shops have been given the permission to operate six days a week from 7 am to 7:30 pm with adequate precautions.
The Eastern Naval Command (ENC) will join the armed forces across the country to show solidarity with the “corona warriors” Sunday. A host of events will be organised by various units under the ENC to pay tribute to doctors, nurses, other health workers, hygiene and sanitation staff, police personnel and media personnel who have been risking their lives and relentlessly fighting the COVID and containing the spread of the pandemic, a statement said.
On Sunday morning, Naval Officer-in-Charge (Andhra Pradesh) will be visiting Government TB and Chest Hospital and GITAM Hospital, at Visakhapatnam, which are the designated COVID hospitals, and felicitate the medical fraternity. This will be followed by a naval helicopter from INS Dega showering flower petals on hospitals treating COVID patients at Visakhapatnam. Two Indian Navy ships will also be at anchorage off RK Beach and illuminated from 7:30 pm to midnight on Sunday. They will also salute the ‘corona warriors’ through traditional naval ceremonials. Two ENC ships will be at anchorage off the Marina Beach at Chennai to honour and salute these ‘corona warriors’ by illuminating and traditional naval ceremonials. The ships will also fire green flares signifying good wishes for the health of our citizens.

All shops selling foreign and country-made liquor in the state are allowed to operate with immediate effect, Additional Commissioner of Excise, S K Medhi said in an order on Saturday. Transportation of liquor consignments is also allowed as per the provisions of the Assam Excise Rules, 2016, the order stated. (PTI)
People queue up to collect food in Noida while maintaining social distance as per guidelines on Saturday. (Express Photo by Gajendra Yadav)

Rahul Gandhi has raised data security concerns over Aarogya Setu App, that has been made mandatory for all at workplaces. "The Aarogya Setu app, is a sophisticated surveillance system, outsourced to a pvt operator, with no institutional oversight - raising serious data security & privacy concerns. Technology can help keep us safe; but fear must not be leveraged to track citizens without their consent," Gandhi tweeted.
The Arogya Setu app, is a sophisticated surveillance system, outsourced to a pvt operator, with no institutional oversight - raising serious data security & privacy concerns. Technology can help keep us safe; but fear must not be leveraged to track citizens without their consent.
A day after the central government extended the nationwide lockdown by two more weeks, the Congress Saturday asked the Government to explain the rationale behind the second extension – its purpose, objective and the overall strategy to contain the spread of the epidemic. The Congress also asked the government to reveal its exit strategy from lockdown 3.0, its roadmap to check unemployment and revival of the economy. Read more 
Here are the top developments on coronavirus situation in India and round the world. Watch video here

After the Karnataka government decided to allow one-time movement of people stranded in different districts to their native places, a large number of migrant workers gathered at the Majestic bus terminal in Bengaluru Saturday. But much to their dismay, the migrant workers were forced to shell out three times the normal bus fare. Social distancing norms went for a toss when more than at least 500 people gathered at the bus station, with very few people to control the swelling crowd. The stranded migrant workers are going to different parts of Karnataka from Bengaluru, which is a red zone district. Read full story by Darshan Devaiah BP
Jammu and Kashmir recorded 27 new positive cases of COVID-19 on Saturday. Out of them, two were from Jammu and 25 from Kashmir. Out of 666 total cases, 404 are now active, 254 have recovered and 8 died.

In the last 24 hours, the number of coronavirus cases in India has risen by 2,411, taking the country’s tally to 37,776 cases, including 1,223 deaths and 10,017 recoveries.
 Migrants in Nashik being taken back to their native places in buses. (Express Photo: Prashant Nadkar)
The lockdown, which was initially planned for 21 days starting March 25, has now been extended for the third time. While Maharashtra remains the worst- affected states with over 11,000 deaths and 485 deaths, Kerala, for the first time in over one month, reported zero new cases of Coronavirus on Friday. Kerala, which was the first state in India to have Coronavirus patients, has seen the slowest rise in numbers in the last month among states with large caseloads. Right now it has 497 confirmed cases, and just three deaths.
The Centre divided districts in the country into ‘red’, ‘orange’ and ‘green’ zones as per the doubling rate and number of cases. At least 130 districts are in the red zone, 284 in orange and 319 in green. Metropolitan cities like Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata, Hyderabad, Pune, Bengaluru, Chennai and Ahmedabad are in the red zone. The government said it could be possible to relax restrictions in red and orange zones.
 Panchkula's market at Sector 7 under lockdown. (Express photo)
After getting the nod from the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Railways will run “Shramik Special” trains from Friday to move migrant workers, pilgrims, tourists, students and other persons stranded at different places due to the Covid-19 lockdown, which has been extended by two more weeks starting May 4.
In a statement, the Railway Ministry said these special trains will be run from point to point on the request of both the concerned state governments as per the standard protocols for sending and receiving such stranded persons. “The Railways and state governments shall appoint senior officials as nodal officers for coordination and smooth operation of these ‘Shramik Specials’,” it said.
