Coronavirus India Updates, 27 July: Covid-19 fatality rate progressively falling in India, says govt
Coronavirus India Updates: Coronavirus cases in India breached the 14 lakh-mark on Monday with another record spike of 49,931 new cases in the last 24 hours. India has been adding over 45,000 new cases daily since 5 days in a row now. The country’s caseload continues to remain the third-worst in the world with 14,35,453 cases.
Over 9,17 lakh people have recovered after testing positive for the coronavirus while 4,85,114 of them are still active. The toll rose to 32,771 with 708 deaths in the last 24 hours. (Follow coronavirus LIVE UPDATES here)
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh are accounting for almost 60% of the new cases. Out of these, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka continue to be among the fastest-growing states in the country.
The human clinical trial of indigenously developed Covaxin, a possible vaccine against the novel coronavirus, began at an institute in Bhubaneswar on Monday, news agency PTI reported.
The much-awaited trial of BBV152 COVID-19 vaccine or Covaxin commenced at the Institute of Medical Sciences and SUM Hospital, one of the 12 centres selected by Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) for conducting phase one and two of the process, the official at the facility said.
Covaxin, which is being developed by Bharat Biotech, was administered to several selected persons who had volunteered to be part of the crucial trial.
In a bid to further ramp up Covid-19 testing capacity, Prime Minister Narendra Modi Monday launched “high throughput” testing facilities in Noida, Mumbai and Kolkata and said India was in a much better position than other countries in fight against the pandemic.
Prime Minister Modi said the labs would not only be restricted to Covid-19 testing but would be expanded for testing of other diseases like Hepatitis B & C, HIV, and Dengue in the future.
“Today, there are more than 11,000 COVID-19 facilities and more than 11 lakh isolation beds in the country. We also have nearly 1,300 testing labs in the country and more than 5 lakh tests are being conducted daily,” Modi said during the launch.
India’s Covid-19 fatality rate has been progressively falling and currently stands at 2.28 per cent which is among the lowest in the world, the government said on Monday, attributing the dip to factors like aggressive testing and an effective containment strategy.
It also said that the recovery rate has been improving consistently and the total recoveries have now crossed the nine lakh-mark, news agency PTI reported.
The focused efforts of the Centre, state governments and Union Territory administrations on early detection and isolation through aggressive testing and efficient clinical management of hospitalised cases have shown results with continuously falling case fatality rate and improving recovery rate, the health ministry said.
“With effective containment strategy, aggressive testing and standardised clinical management protocols based on holistic standard of care approach, the case fatality rate has significantly dipped,” the ministry said in a statement.
A weekend lockdown serves no purpose in the fight against the novel coronavirus, Haryana Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar said on Sunday. His government was making continuous efforts to rebuild confidence in the people, and there were no plans to impose any more lockdowns, the Chief Minister said.
The Covid-19 situation in Haryana was under control, case numbers were better than many other states, and near normalcy had returned across the state, Khattar said at an online Idea Exchange with The Indian Express.
“A lockdown will not serve any purpose unless it is imposed for a 14-day period. Imposing a lockdown over the weekend or for two days merely gives the impression that something is being done,” the Chief Minister said.
Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot on Sunday directed officials to make the tocilizumab injection and plasma therapy available for patients in need of intensive care.
He assured that the state will immediately approve funds for making the expensive tocilizumab injection, that costs Rs 40,000 available as it is out of the reach for the poor.
In a coronavirus review meeting, Gehlot asked officials to ensure availability of plasma and life-saving injections as per requirement in all medical colleges and district hospitals of the state.”Make such an arrangement that the plasma needed for therapy should be present in our bank. For this, awareness campaigns and donation camps should be set up,” Gehlot said.
After a jump of over 80,000 cases in the month of July along with the continuing trend of uptick in infections, the Andhra Pradesh government has ordered 90,000 doses of the antiviral drug Remedesvir. Hetero Pharma will deliver the first consignment of 15,000 doses this week while the remaining will be delivered over the next three weeks, according to officials.
Officials said Sunday that the state is now carrying out 50,000 tests per day. The number of deaths in the state crossed the 1,000 mark Sunday and stands at 1,041. The case count in the state has gone up from 14,515 on June 30 to 96,298 as of July 26.
Arunachal Pradesh Health Minister Alo Libang flagged off the first batch of 5 basic life support ambulances on Sunday to help tackle the state’s fight against coronavirus. Libang said that the state government has placed an order for 25 ambulances, including 20 BLS and five advanced life support systems, under the North East Special Infrastructure Development Scheme.
The ambulances would be placed at the district hospitals of West Siang, Changlang, Kurung Kumey, at the proposed COVID Care Centre at the MLA apartment in Chimpu, and the COVID Hospital at Midpu, the minister said.
Punjab recorded its biggest single day spike both in Covid fatalities and fresh infections on Sunday, pushing the total count of deaths to 306 and positive cases to 13,218. Of the total 306 deaths, 107 died in the last fortnight alone.
For the first time, all the 22 districts of Punjab reported fresh cases. This was also the first time when a single-day spike of new cases surpassed the 500 mark. On Sunday, 105 patients were on oxygen support and 20 on ventilator support.
Although West Bengal’s recovery rate has gone up to 64.29%(an increase of 5.73 percentage points as compared to last week), the test-positivity rate remains high at 7.29%. The test-positivity rate has been steadily increasing every week for the past one month. The infection growth rate, however, fell marginally — from 5.9% last week to 5.18% — and the consequent doubling rate of infection — calculated over seven-day average growth — slowed down from 12 days to 14 days.
This week, 75% of the cases, and 90% of the fatalities were recorded in the pandemic epicentre in south Bengal comprising Kolkata, its adjoining districts North 24 Parganas, South 24 Parganas, and Howrah; and Hooghly.

