PM Modi, Shah to skip Holi events over Coronavirus fear
With the fear of Coronavirus spreading across the country, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Wednesday decided to skip Holi events this year to avoid mass gatherings. Ahead of the festival, PM Modi in a tweet said that experts across the world have advised reducing mass gatherings to avoid the spread of COVID-19 Novel Coronavirus.
Experts across the world have advised to reduce mass gatherings to avoid the spread of COVID-19 Novel Coronavirus. Hence, this year I have decided not to participate in any Holi Milan programme.
— Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 4, 2020
Union Home Minister Amit Shah is also avoiding Holi Milan in wake of Coronavirus. “Holi is a very important festival for we Indians but in the wake of Coronavirus, I’ve decided not to participate in any Holi Milan celebration this year. I also appeal to everyone to avoid public gatherings&take good care of yourself&your family,” he said.
Urging everyone to stay safe, BJP President JP Nadda also decided to cancel Holi celebrations. “the world is battling COVID-19 Novel Corona Virus. The countries and medical fraternity are jointly making efforts to contain its spread. Keeping this in mind, this year, I will neither celebrate Holi nor organise Holi Milan. Stay Safe, Stay Healthy.”
Six cases of coronavirus have been detected in India so far, the Union Health Ministry said on Tuesday. The government Tuesday announced that all international passengers to India will now have to submit self-declaration forms on arrival. Currently, passengers arriving via flights from 12 countries — Italy, Iran, China, Hong Kong, Japan, South Korea, Thailand, Singapore, Nepal, Indonesia, Vietnam and Malaysia — have to undergo compulsory screening at 21 airports.
Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Wednesday said efforts are on to check and screen 88 people who came in contact with the Delhi man who tested positive for coronavirus. A taskforce headed by him has been formed to tackle the situation emerging from the coronavirus infection and there is no need to panic, PTI reported.

