Coronavirus 30 April Highlights: Russian PM tests positive; India will be eternally proud of frontline workers, says Modi
Coronavirus Highlights:  Prime Minister Narendra Modi Thursday said India will fight Covid-19 courageously and will remain eternally proud of its frontline workers. Retweeting a video where a healthworker is seen to be welcomed home by her family and society members on her return after “20 days’ non-stop service”, PM Modi wrote, “Moments like this fill the heart with happiness. This is the spirit of India. We will courageously fight COVID-19. We will remain eternally proud of those working on the frontline.”
Meanwhile, Maharashtra and Gujarat continued to see rise in cases on Thursday with cases in the former crossing 10,000-mark. With 1,018 new cases reported in last 24 hours, the Covid-19 tally in India surged past 33,000 mark to stand at 33,610 with as many as 1,075 fatalities. According to the Health Ministry, 630 patients recovered in past one day taking the total number of recoveries to 8,372. Lav Agarwal, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, said the recovery rate in India has thus improved to 25.19% while the case fatality stood at 3.2%.
On the global front, the novel coronavirus has so far claimed at least 227,971 lives and infected at least 3.2 million people worldwide since its outbreak at the beginning of this year, according to a tally by John Hopkins University. The United States is the worst-hit, with over 1,039,909 cases and over 59,000 deaths. The worst-affected countries in the world after US in terms of infections are Spain (2,36,899), Italy (2,03,591), France (1,66,543) and United Kingdom (1,66,441).

Gujarat on Thursday reported 313 COVID-19 cases, taking state tally to 4,437, while the testing capacity of the state has been increased — 4,519 tests were done in last 24 hours.
As many as 18 COVID-19 patients succumbed to the infection, with five of them having no other serious ailments, taking the death toll in the state to 218. Read more here
Looking at the road ahead for the post-lockdown period, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday held a detailed meeting on the defence industry in the country and initiatives that can help the economy recover. 
The government said in a statement that the “detailed meeting” was to “deliberate the potential reforms to ensure a robust and self-reliant defence industry in India that caters to short and long term needs of the armed forces and initiatives to give a boost to the economy in the backdrop of COVID-19”. Read more here
AFTER the state government announced guidelines for stranded persons to go back home in various districts of Maharashtra, Pune District Collector Naval Kishore Ram on Thursday said the administration was in the process of creating a system using which stranded persons – migrant workers, pilgrims, students, professionals and others – can apply to go back to their homes within or outside the state. Ram said it will take the administration two or three days to put the system in place and the stranded persons should not panic. Read more here
Stressing that industry was critical to reviving the state’s economy, CM Amarinder Singh Thursday asked all Deputy Commissioners to explore ways of facilitating their operations. The CM was interacting with the DCs during a video-conference.
He said of the 2.5 lakh odd industries in the state, only around 3,600 were eligible to open, and of these a mere 1,100 had chosen to open up. Read more here
Tension prevailed in Godhra town Thursday night after residents pelted stones at a police team that had come to seal a containment zone. One police-sub inspector was reportedly injured. Eight people, including three women, have been detained from the spot.
According to the police, the team went to Guhya mohalla to barricade and seal the entry and exit points after it was declared a containment zone. On Thursday, three wards – three, six and nine – were declared containment zones. Guhya mohalla is adjacent to Polan Bazaar, which has five active cases of Covid-19 as of Thursday night. Read more here
The four-member inter ministerial central team headed by Bhuphinder Bhalla, Additional Secretary, Union Ministry of Commerce, visited four places in Ahmedabad city on Thursday to asses the lockdown and its impact.
“The team, which came about five days ago, has already visited the quarantined zones in old city. They have also visited various industries and hospitals and assessed the situation on ground,” Ahmedabad District Collector KK Nirala told The Indian Express. Read more here
With less than half of its working hands, Rail Coach Factory, Kapurthala – one of the biggest rail coach manufacturing unit in the country — is up and running amid the coronavirus lockdown. But less staff is not the only challenge the RCF faces. There is shortage of raw material, and the strict lockdown conditions it must comply with to keep the unit running. But RCF is doing it in a way that it sets an example for other industrial units in the country.
The factory has made its own hand sanitisers, 8,000 special fabric reusable masks, 350 PPE kits. It has already equipped its hospital situated inside RCF township with COVID-19 facilities by creating 20-bedded quarantine facility, 12-bedded isolation facility. Read more here
Even after returning two lots of faulty rapid testing kits (RTKs) to the Indian Council of Medical Research, Punjab is now preparing to utilise 2,500 RTKs procured from a private dealer to ramp up its testing in view of the influx of pilgrims, students and labourers from other states.
Sources in the government said that the state has taken approval from the ICMR to use the RTKs after validating them on COVID-19 positive patients. Read more here
A DAY after the Centre issued fresh guidelines regarding movement of stranded persons, the Rajasthan government on Thursday initiated the process of sending hundreds of labourers back to their native places in Haryana.
Congress MLA from Haryana’s Dabwali constituency Amit Sihag, who is coordinating with Rajasthan officials, told The Indian Express that arrangements have been made to send over 1,000 stranded labourers from Jaisalmer district of Rajasthan to Haryana. “These labourers had gone to work in agricultural fields, harvest gram and mustard, in Jaisalmer district. But they got stranded there,” said Sihag. Read more here
Russian Prime Minister Mikhail Mishustin says he has tested positive for the new coronavirus and has told President Vladimir Putin he will selfisolateFirst Deputy Prime Minister Andrei Belousov will temporarily perform Mishustins duties but the prime minister said Thursday that he would stay in touch on key issues Mishustin 54 was named prime minister in January During a video call Putin voiced hope that Mishustin would continue taking part in drafting policies to shore up the Russian economy which has been hurt by the virus pandemic In Russia the prime minister oversees the economy and answers to the president. AFP
Prime Minister Narendra Modi Thursday said India will fight Covid-19 courageously and will remain eternally proud of its frontline workers. Retweeting a video where a healthworker is seen to be welcomed by her family and society members on her return after “20 days’ non-stop service”, PM Modi wrote, “Moments like this fill the heart with happiness. This is the spirit of India. We will courageously fight COVID-19. We will remain eternally proud of those working on the frontline.”
Moments like this fill the heart with happiness. This is the spirit of India.We will courageously fight COVID-19.We will remain eternally proud of those working on the frontline. https://t.co/5amb5nkikS
The four member inter-ministerial central team headed by Bhuphinder Bhalla, additional secretary, Union Ministry of Commerce on Thursday visited four places in Ahmedabad to assess the lockdown and its impact. "The team which came about five days ago have already visited the quarantined zones in the old city. They have also visited various industries and hospitals and assessed the situation on ground," said K K Nirala, the district collector of Ahmedabad, while talking to The Indian Express.
On Thursday, the team visited Sola Civil hospital and HCG hospital. They also visited Gujarat Medical Services Corporation warehouse in Naroda and in the evening visited the APMC market at Jetalpur. "They are inspecting how systems are working in lockdown. They are looking at the problems faced by farmers and briefing the Centre in this regard," Nirala added. The team also has members from Union Ministry of Heath Research and Food Corporation of India. - Avinash Nair reports from Gujarat 
The Karnataka Cabinet Thursday decided to allow one-time movement of people stranded in different districts and states to their native places. It also decided that those from other states stranded in the state will be allowed to exit Karnataka beginning Friday.
Law and Parliamentary Affairs Minister J C Madhuswamy said, “The government will allow students, tourists, labourers and others stranded in Karnataka with valid reasons to travel back to their home states. The government will arrange buses at a nominal fare for large groups wanting to travel to their natives.” Read Karnataka wrap here

Tripura got its first vehicle sanitising tunnel at Bodhjungnagar Industrial Complex in West district on Thursday. It would be used to sanitise vehicles entering the industrial growth centre during lockdown period to ensure safety of industrial workers against COVID-19, a statement said. According to Industries and Commerce Secretary Kiran Dinkarrao Gitte, the decision was taken in compliance with an order from the Ministry of Home Affairs on April 15.
“Tripura Industrial Development Corporation Ltd has installed Vehicle Sanitizing Tunnel at Gate No-2 with the assistance of Agartala Municipal Corporation. Presently, entrance & exit of all vehicles/trucks are being allowed through Gate No-2 only so as to sanitize all vehicles entering to the Bodhjungnagar Industrial Complex properly. The objective of providing such tunnel is to sanitize all incoming vehicles to the Industrial complex by spreading disinfectant,” his statement reads.
The sanitisation tunnel has cost Rs 4 lakhs. The Agartala Municipal Corporation executed the project maintaining all prescribed guidelines, Secretary Kiran Gitte said in the statement. - Debraj Deb reports from Tripura

US' Director of National Intelligence has said the coronavirus "was not man made or genetically modified". In a statement, the office said: “The entire Intelligence Community has been consistently providing critical support to US policy makers and those responding to the Covid-19 virus, which originated in China. The Intelligence Community also concurs with the wide scientific consensus that the Covid-19 virus was not man made or genetically modified.”
About 60,000 foreign nationals from 72 countries were evacuated from India, the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) said on Thursday. Anurag Srivastava, the ministry spokesperson, said the issue of evacuation of Indians stranded abroad is also under discussion and that all the Indian missions are extending all possible assistance to the diaspora community. It is learnt that the government is working on a plan to deploy a raft of naval ships as well as military and commercial aircraft to evacuate thousands of Indians stranded in the Gulf and other regions after the nationwide lockdown ends. (PTI)
Bihar govt wants central government to run special trains to bring migrants home.
After testing journalists and police personnel, Karnataka government has now started testing frontline government employees.
After testing journalists and police personnel, the #Karnataka government has started to test all the frontline government employees. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/aAUrN9bqhI
Police personnel of South West Delhi welcome their colleague of Safdarjung Police Station, after he was discharged from hospital. He was posted with AIIMS police post and had tested positive for COVID-19.
#JUSTIN: Police personnel of South-West district welcoming their colleague, of Safdarjung police station, after he was discharged from hospital. He was posted with AIIMS police post and tested positive for COVID-19. #CoronaKoHaranaHai @IndianExpress, @ieDelhi pic.twitter.com/nAOmOxmId7
Punjab recorded 105 new cases, which is biggest single-day rise so far for the state. Total number of positve cases stands at 480 now

 Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan  (Twitter/@drharshvardhan)
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Thursday said about 60,000 foreign nationals from 72 countries have been evacuated from India and the issue of evacuation of Indians stranded abroad was also under discussion. Ministry spokesperson Anurag Srivastava also assured that the Indian missions were extending all possible assistance to the diaspora community.
Earlier in the day, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi held a video-interaction with former Reserve Bank of India governor Raghuram Rajan on the economic impact of the nationwide lockdown. The economist told the former Congress chief that India needs to be cleverer in lifting the lockdown and open up its economy in a "measured way" as it does not have the capacity to support people across the spectrum for too long. Rajan also said that India needs Rs 65,000 crore to help the poor in the times of pandemic and considering its total GDP, it can afford to do that.
Earlier, Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan Wednesday said that of the total active cases in the country, only 0.33 per cent patients are on ventilators, 1.5 per cent are on oxygen support and 2.34 per cent are in ICU. Active COVID-19 patients are those who have been diagnosed with the disease and are currently undergoing treatment in hospitals or are lodged in quarantine facilities.
Meanwhile, Punjab has extended the curfew in the state by two more weeks but with a relaxation of four hours everyday, Chief Minister Amarinder Singh said Wednesday. Addressing the people of the state, Amarinder Singh said residents would be allowed to step out of their homes from 7 am to 11 am every day. In Madhya Pradesh’s worst-hit Indore, the number of COVID-19 cases saw a sharp increase on Wednesday as they mounted to 1,466, with 94 new cases being reported in the last 24-hours. This comes despite the curfew being in place in urban areas of the district for more than a month now.
 In Madhya Pradesh’s worst-hit Indore, the number of COVID-19 cases saw a sharp increase on Wednesday as they mounted to 1,466, with 94 new cases being reported in the last 24-hours.
