India Coronavirus Updates, 12 July: Delhi puts on hold plan to turn stadiums into Covid care centres; Bihar records over 1k new cases for first time
Coronavirus India Updates: India’s coronavirus tally rose by 28,367 on Sunday, taking the total number of cases to 8,49,553. And the death toll climbed to 22,674, with 551 deaths being reported in the last 24 hours, data from the Health Ministry showed. There are around 2,92,258 active cases in the country, while 5,34,620 have recovered from the infection.
According to the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), nearly 1,15,87,153 samples have been tested so far with 2,50,151 samples tested on Saturday. Maharashtra has reported the highest number of cases at 2,46,000 followed by Tamil Nadu at 1,34,226 and Delhi at 1,10,921.
Authorities in Delhi have put on hold their plan to use sports stadiums as makeshift Covid care centres as of now in view of the good recovery rate the city is witnessing, officials said on Sunday. Seeing the current situation, there is no need to turn stadiums into Covid facilities, an official in the East Delhi district administration said.
Last month, a Delhi government panel constituted by LG Anil Baijal had proposed to convert Pragati Maidan, Talkatora Indoor Stadium, Indira Gandhi Indoor Stadium, JLN Stadium, Thyagaraj Indoor Stadium and Dhyanchand National Stadium for the purpose. A government study on Saturday said that there has been a “sharp decline” in daily fatality figures in the national capital in the past two weeks.
Bihar registered the highest single-day spike of 1,266 coronavirus cases, taking the caseload of the state to 16,305 on Sunday, while seven more deaths took the toll to 125, the Health Department said. There are 4,227 active cases of COVID-19 and 11,953 people have recovered from the infection so far, the department said. Out of the 1,266 new cases, the maximum number of 177 infections were from Patna district, followed by Siwan (98), Bhagalpur (81), Nalanda (78), Nawada and Begusarai (76), Munger (61) and West Champaran (54).
India is in a “good position” in the battle against the Covid-19 pandemic and the nation will fight the disease with determination and enthusiasm,Home Minister Amit Shah said on Sunday. Shah spoke after participating in a mega plantation drive initiated by the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) to plant 1.37 crore saplings in their campuses by this month-end. He planted a peepal sapling at the CRPF officers’ training academy campus in Kadarpur village here.
“If a successful battle against coronavirus has been fought anywhere in the world, it is in India,” said Home Minister Amit Shah in Gurgaon on Sunday. He said the country is “in a good position” in the battle against Coronavirus, fighting with “passion” and “determination”
“If a successful battle against Coronavirus has been fought anywhere in the world,it is in India”,said Home Minister Amit Shah in Gurgaon today.He said the country is “in a good position” in the battle against Coronavirus,fighting with “passion” & “determination”. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/RYcXjVKfzE
— Sakshi Dayal (@sakshi_dayal) July 12, 2020
Leader of Opposition in the Gujarat Assembly, Paresh Dhanani, Sunday held a sit-in protest at a civil hospital in Amreli demanding a laboratory to test Covid samples, following which he was detained, the police said.
Dhanani alleged the state government had ignored his demand for a dedicated testing facility despite rising number of coronavirus cases cases in the Amreli district. “It is important to test people for coronavirus. Since March 26, I have been repeatedly requesting the government for a modern COVID-19 testing laboratory at Amreli civil hospital. “With the number of coronaviruscases increasing in Amreli, there is a need to increase the sample size and test more number of people,” news agency PTI quoted the Congress leader as saying after he was released by the police.
The Uttar Pradesh government has decided to implement strict lockdown on weekends in order to stop the spread of coronavirus, PTI quoted a senior official as saying.
“The lockdown on weekends will be implemented from coming Saturday and Sunday especially in crowded areas. The markets and offices will remain closed on these days. However, the banks will remain open,” Additional Chief Secretary (Home and Information) Awanish Awasthi said.
The lockdown will remain effective in both urban and rural areas of the state.
On a day when Uttar Pradesh recorded another peak in the daily new cases of novel coronavirus with 1,403 new infection, capital Lucknow recorded 202 new cases – the highest in the state. With this, the state’s caseload has gone up to 35,092. In the past 24 hours, 25 people infected with SARS-CoV-2 have died, taking the state’s Covid toll to 913.
Lucknow Chief Medical Officer Dr Narendra Agarwal said that the fresh cases in the district have been reported from 41 different spots. “Of these highest 14 are from the Gomti Nagar area, 10 from the district Cantonment area, eight from the DG office, six from Mandi Samiti on Sitapur road, three from the police headquarters in Mahanagar, two from the homeguards headquarter and the other three are doctors of the King George’s Medical University (KGMU).”
A day after Amitabh Bachchan and his son Abhishek revealed their diagnosis of Covid-19, the megastar’s daughter-in-law Aishwarya (46) and granddaughter Aaradhya (8) also tested positive for the virus. His wife Jaya has tested negative for coronavirus.
While the father-son duo were admitted to Nanavati Hospital on Saturday after showing mild symptoms, Aishwarya and Aaradhya are asymptomatic and are set to remain in home isolation.
A Nanavati hospital official said, “Both (Amitabh and Abhishek) are stable and have mild symptoms. Abhishek Bachchan may soon be advised home isolation and discharged.”
Karnataka Health Minister B Sriramulu said that the number of coronavirus cases in Karnataka may double in the next 15 to 30 days and the coming two months would emerge as a challenge for the government in tackling the coronavirus pandemic, PTI reported.
However, there was no need for any panic and people should follow Covid-19 related regulations to stay safe, he said in a series of tweets.
“Lockdown has been announced in Bengaluru from Tuesday 8 pm for the next seven days. Abide by the regulations. Everyday more than 2,000 cases of coronavirus are coming to fore,” Sriramulu said on Saturday.
Karnataka Tourism Minister CT Ravi tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday. He is the first minister in the state to have tested positive for the virus.
The total number of coronavirus cases in the state touched 36,216, including 613 deaths and 14,716 recoveries.
The Covid-19 tally in Puducherry rose to 1,418 on Sunday with 81 more people testing positive for the virus, Health Minister Malladi Krishna Rao said, PTI reported.
The total active cases in the union territory now stand at 661, with 739 recoveries so far.
Rajasthan on Sunday reported four more Covid-19 deaths and 153 new cases, taking the total tally of coronavirus cases in the state to 23,901, PTI reported.
Of the new cases, 42 were reported from Alwar, 31 from Jaipur, 25 from Ajmer, 14 in Kota, 13 in Sirohi, eight in Karauli, seven in Barmer, four each in Bundi and Jhunjhunu and two in Banswara.
There are as many as 5,492 active cases at present, and 17,902 people have recovered.
Union Minister G Kishan Reddy Sunday visited the Gandhi Hospital in Hyderabad and assured doctors and others of the Centre’s support in the fight against the coronavirus pandemic, PTI reported.
The minister interacted with doctors, paramedical staff and patients in the state-run hospital and enquired about the facilities being provided and measures being taken to handle the pandemic, an official release said.
Telangana has around 33,402 cases of Covid-19, with 348 deaths.
Goa Health Minister Vishwajit Rane Sunday said that public transport buses and bus stands in the state need to be sanitised in view of the rising number of coronavirus cases, PTI reported.
Goa reported 117 new cases on Saturday, taking the total tally to 2,368.
“It is the need of the hour to fumigate bus stands and buses which are used for public transport. It will be discussed with the chief minister. Whatever activities we need to outsource to other agencies will also be discussed with the chief secretary and state health secretary,” he said.
The Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation (BMC) found that the rise in the number of coronavirus cases in the city was mainly due to violation of social distancing norms, PTI quoted an official as saying. 317 Covid-19 cases have been reported in the first ten days of July.
The spurt in the number of Covid-19 cases was witnessed after people started coming here from hotspot districts with restrictions being eased and many patients from outside the state capital are being admitted to city hospitals, BMC Commissioner PC Chaudhury said.
As many as 640 coronavirus cases have been reported from the state capital and 317 out of them are active, the BMC Commissioner said.
In what would further bolster the Delhi government’s faith in its home isolation set-up, seven of the 691 people who died of Covid in the last fortnight were under home isolation, while the rest were already in hospitals. This, officials say, is indicative of the fact that home isolation for very mild and asymptomatic patients is a relatively safe approach — contrary to apprehensions raised by the Centre recently that keeping Covid patients at home is risky since they may not reach hospitals on time if their condition deteriorates.
The data emerged days after Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal sought detailed information about those who had died of the disease in the capital recently.
It was made public on a day when the capital reported1,781 Covid cases — the second time in the past two weeks that the number has dipped below 2,000.
With cases hovering around the 2,000 mark over the past two weeks, down from 3,000 or higher mid-June, the number of active cases in the city also fell to 19,895, as 2,998 people recovered.
Delhi has recorded 3,334 deaths and 1,10,921 cases so far — a fatality rate of 3%.
Meanwhile, restaurants across the city are grappling with decreased sales, staff shortages and few dine-in customers, after reopening a month ago after the coronavirus lockdown, PTI reported.
Many restaurants have not started dine-in facilities and are relying on takeaways to drive their business.
Lite Bite Foods director Rohit Aggarwal said the situation has not been “very motivating, walk-in numbers are extremely low and the operational cost is soaring.”
He added that people are still apprehensive of stepping out and going to confined public places such as malls and restaurants.
As Maharashtra completes 116 days after it recorded the first coronavirus death, the state crossed 10,000 deaths with an addition of 223 deaths on Saturday. The death toll now stands at 10,116. Besides this, the overall count also bypassed all previous records with 8,139 new cases yesterday. The state recorded 71,836 cases in only 11 days of July. Follow Maharashtra Coronavirus Live Updates
A 57-year-old Assistant Municipal Commissioner of the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) succumbed to Covid-19 on Saturday evening. Ashok Khairnar was handling H-east ward (Bandra east), one of the worst-hit Covid-19 hotspots which also has the residence of Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray.

