Coronavirus India Highlights: Cases in Maharashtra cross 50,000 mark
The number of Covid-19 cases in India on Sunday rose to 1,31,868 with 6,767 new infections reported in the last 24 hours. Of these, 73,560 cases are active infections, while 54,440 patients have been discharged. The death toll has climbed to 3,867.
Coronavirus India LIVE Updates: With over 1.38 lakh cases, India now among top 10 worst-hit countries
The state of Maharashtra continues to be worst-affected in the country as it recorded over 3,000 cases on Sunday, taking the state tally to over 50,000. With 58 deaths due to the pandemic reported during the day, the death toll in the state rose to 1635. Earlier in the day, Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray hinted at a possible extension of lockdown in the state after May 31, saying that it was wrong to impose the lockdown suddenly and that it cannot be lifted all at once.
Globally, over 5.2 million people have been infected with the novel coronavirus, including 3.4 lakh deaths. Brazil has surpassed Russia to become the nation with the second-highest number of infections, behind only the US, according to a tally kept by Johns Hopkins University.

A three-day infant girl died of Covid-19 in Chandigarh on Sunday. The infant’s mother, a resident of Daddu Majra, had given birth to the infant at the Civil Hospital in Sector 22 on Thursday and the infant was brought dead to PGIMER at 11 pm on Saturday night. She tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday evening and is the fourth patient patient in Chandigarh to have died due to the disease. Read more here
In absence of any strategy outlined by the Government of India to assess community spread in districts and states, Panchkula health administration has taken it upon itself to check if such a phenomenon has begun in the district. The Indian Express explains their method of research and the results, along with what it might mean for the district. Read more here
Around 80 residents of Assam and Manipur who were expected to board a train to their home states from Bharuch late on Saturday were stranded after they were not allowed to board. According to officials, the train, with a capacity of 1,200 passengers, left on Saturday with 750 passengers on board as against the 900 to whom tickets were issued.
The Bharuch district administration claimed that the passengers arrived late and missed the train. Read more here
As many as 394 fresh cases of Covid-19 were reported from across the state, taking the total tally to over 14,000. Ahmedabad and Surat recorded 29 deaths on Sunday — 28 and 1 respectively.
The death toll in the state reached 861, while the total number of positive cases stood at 14,083, with 279 fresh cases being reported in Ahmedabad. Read More here
Taking note of a report purportedly prepared by a medical officer of Ahmedabad Civil Hospital, which raises several complaints against the Covid-19 hospitals in Ahmedabad, the Gujarat High Court has formed a three-member committee to look into the matter.
The members appointed by the high court are Dr Ami Parikh, Head of the General Medicines and Dr Advait Thakore, Head of the Emergency Medicines, both from Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation- run SVP Hospital along with Dr Bipin Amin, Professor (Medicines) at the Civil Hospital, Ahmedabad. Read more here
For 12 days now, migrant workers boarding the Railways’ special Shramik trains from major stations have been handed a cooked meal, a snack, a bottle of water and, in some cases, soap or hand sanitiser and a face mask, thanks to a civil society initiative that started with providing food to the neediest communities during the lockdown and is now also reaching out to those boarding trains and buses home.
Since May 13, when they began with providing packed meals to passengers on board six or seven trains, they have clocked more than one lakh meals in total for those boarding the trains alone. In addition, the initiative is also serving those boarding buses from Thane’s Majiwade junction. Read more here
With 10,000 cases recorded in the last four days, the number of novel coronavirus cases in Maharashtra crossed the 50,000-mark Sunday with 3,041 fresh cases, the highest in a single day so far. The overall patient count in the state now stands at 50,231, of which Mumbai alone accounts for 30,452 cases.
The total death toll in the state reached 1,654, including 988 deaths in Mumbai. Of the 58 deaths reported Sunday, 39 were from Mumbai, six each from Solapur and Pune, four from Aurangabad, and one each from Latur, Thane, and Mira Bhayandar. Read more here
Barbers have started reopening their salons in Pimpri-Chinchwad, two months after they were forced to shut down businesses due to a nationwide lockdown imposed in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak. While they have received a green signal by the Pimpri-Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC) to open their shops, there is no such permission issued to barbers by the Pune Municipal Corporation so far.
Through an order issued on Friday, the Pimpri-Chinchwad municipal commissioner allowed salons and beauty parlours to reopen. Late on Saturday, the civic body issued strict guidelines on how to run barbers’ shops/beauty parlours by adopting strict social distancing norms. The administration has allowed only salons outside containment zones to reopen. Read more here
Days after the state government declared Pimpri-Chinchwad a non-red zone, the industrial city continues to see a spike in Covid-19 cases with Anandnagar slums emerging as a hotspot. The rapid spread of infection in the slum has raised concern among PCMC officials, who are busy devising new strategies to bring the situation under control.
On Saturday, Anandnagar slums reported 26 positive cases. And on Sunday, 37 more tested positive, taking the tally of cases to 107. The figure is the highest for any suburb or slum of Pimpri-Chinchwad. Read more here
Despite assurance to pay Rs 1,000 for each dead body a class IV employee handles, Mumbai’s Rajawadi hospital is facing delays in disposing of bodies. A Covid-19 patient has released a video from the hospital, stating that a body was kept for hours in the ward, sealed, on the cot next where he was put up for treatment.
Dr Vidya Thakur, hospital superintendent, confirmed she had received this complaint, but did not comment further.
The BMC put out a statement saying: “BMC is taking the incident at Rajawadi Hospital very seriously. While authenticity of the video is being verified, administration is taking all precautions to prevent recurrence of any such incident. We are working hard to ensure proper healthcare is provided to all.” 
“As per GoM guidelines, bodies of deceased are to be handed over to kins 30 minutes after death, documentation & formalities for which can cause some delay. This, however, does not justify the unfortunate incident & we are committed to ensure that it doesn’t get repeated.”
In the past few weeks, videos have emerged from Sion hospital and Kandivali Shatabdi hospital of patients complaining that bodies were not being removed on time. The BMC had decided to offer Rs 1,000 to each ward boy for handling one dead body. 
Civic officials said shortage of manpower remains a major reason why bodies are not moved out of ward on time. BMC officials said families, too, are not immediately available to claim the body. ENS
Despite assurance to pay Rs 1,000 for each dead body a class IV employee handles, Mumbai’s Rajawadi hospital is facing delays in disposing of bodies. A Covid-19 patient has released a video from the hospital, stating that a body was kept for hours in the ward, sealed, on the cot next where he was put up for treatment.
Dr Vidya Thakur, hospital superintendent, confirmed she had received this complaint, but did not comment further.
The BMC put out a statement saying: “BMC is taking the incident at Rajawadi Hospital very seriously. While authenticity of the video is being verified, administration is taking all precautions to prevent recurrence of any such incident. We are working hard to ensure proper healthcare is provided to all.” 
“As per GoM guidelines, bodies of deceased are to be handed over to kins 30 minutes after death, documentation & formalities for which can cause some delay. This, however, does not justify the unfortunate incident & we are committed to ensure that it doesn’t get repeated.”
In the past few weeks, videos have emerged from Sion hospital and Kandivali Shatabdi hospital of patients complaining that bodies were not being removed on time. The BMC had decided to offer Rs 1,000 to each ward boy for handling one dead body. 
Civic officials said shortage of manpower remains a major reason why bodies are not moved out of ward on time. BMC officials said families, too, are not immediately available to claim the body. ENS
PUNE DISTRICT recorded eight deaths from Covid-19 on Sunday, with the toll climbing to 272. Among the patients who died is a 21-year-old man from Gultekdi, who was admitted to Sassoon General Hospital on May 22 and succumbed to the infection on the same day. His throat swab tested positive for the coronavirus on May 23 while his death was reported on Sunday.
A total of 258 new positive cases were recorded on the day, with the total number of cases at 5,694, said District Health Officer Dr Bhagwan Pawar.
Among other patients who died was a 63-year-old man from Bhawani Peth, who was admitted to Deenanath Mangeshkar hospital on May 12. He had acute renal failure.
In another case, a 71-year-old man from Ganesh Peth, who was admitted to KEM hospital on May 20, also died of the infection. He too was suffering from acute renal failure. A 56-year-old woman from Salisbury Park, admitted to Sahyadri hospital (Karve Road) on May 8, also succumbed to the infection. She had endometrial cancer.
Chief Minister Capt Amarinder Singh on Sunday directed all deputy commissioners and district police chiefs to ensure that no migrant is forced to walk to any other state or remain hungry while in Punjab.
Any migrant found walking on the road should be transported by police to the nearest place by bus from where he/she can board a train or bus to his/her native state, the chief minister said. Till they leave Punjab, they should be provided food and water, he further said as part of his directions. Read more here
Mumbai police, Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) and State Reserve Police Force (SRPF) personnel will be deployed across the city Monday to ensure strict adherence of social distancing as people celebrate Eid-ul-Fitr.
Markets in the metropolis are usually flooded with people busy shopping for the festival, while thousands of people assemble at prominent places like the Minara Masjid in south Mumbai and Haji Ali Dargah to offer namaz. However, with the Covid-19 cases rising in the city — Mumbai recorded 1,749 new cases Saturday — police have also appealed to the Muslim community to avoid large congregations and offer namaz at home. Read more here
The pace of fresh Covid-19 cases being reported in Karnataka accelerated in the past week, with the tally crossing the 2,000-mark Sunday and doubling in just nine days. The state had reported more than 1,000 cases on May 15.
“As of Sunday, 2089 cases have been reported in Karnataka. This includes 654 discharges. 130 new cases have been reported today,” Karnataka Health Commissioner Pankaj Kumar Pandey said.
The trend of returnees from Maharashtra testing positive the most in the state continued on Sunday as well, as 100 cases (76.92%) fell under the category. Read more here
Three more persons tested positive for coronavirus in Tripura on Sunday, raising the total count to 194. Among them, 165 have ‘recovered’ and been discharged from isolation center at state-run GB Panth Hospital, only 29 person are currently under treatment.All the new cases were found among people who returned from Delhi on the Rajdhani Express.Chief Minister Biplab Kumar Deb took to Twitter in a late evening post and wrote, “991 samples have been tested today in #Tripura for COVID-19. Among them 3 persons found COVID19 #POSITIVE. All of them have returned from #Delhi by Rajdhani Express. #TripuraCOVID19count”.Earlier this evening, cabinet spokesperson Ratan Lal Nath said Tripura currently holds the highest recovery rate at 86.39 percent for coronavirus patients in the country.
With domestic passenger flights to resume from Monday after a hiatus of two months due to the nationwide Covid-19 lockdown, confusion prevailed on Sunday as different states imposed their own set of conditions on reopening airports.
After the Centre announced the resumption of services, many states had expressed reservations. Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Bihar, Punjab, Assam and Andhra Pradesh have announced their respective quarantine measures for passengers arriving at their airports.
Click here to know the rules and schedule set by states.
Any state which wants migrant workers of Uttar Pradesh back, has to seek permission from the state government and need to ensure their socio-legal-monetary rights, Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath said on Sunday.
Upset that migrant labourers were "not properly taken care of" by various states in wake of the coronavirus-triggered lockdown, Adityanath said, "These workers are our biggest resource and will give them employment in Uttar Pradesh as state government is going to set up a commission for their employment."
Government issues SOP for movement of Indian nationals stranded abroad and for those stranded in India desirous to travel abroad.

Maharashtra on Sunday recorded over 3,000 Covid-19 cases, the highest daily spike, taking the state tally to 50,231. With 58 deaths due to the pandemic reported during the day, the death toll in the state rose to 1635.

 India has been able to contain the virus through early implementation of nationwide lockdown.
Even by a simple model, at least 14-29 lakh coronavirus cases and between 37,000 and 71,000 deaths have been averted, said the Centre Friday, highlighting how India has been able to contain the virus through early implementation of nationwide lockdown.
In a routine press briefing to apprise media about the coronavirus situation in the country, Praveen Srivastava, a senior officer with the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI), said the government has shared publicly available data with independent experts to model the impact of lockdown, adding that “in pandemic like this there are no parallels to compare”.
“Two independent economists have estimated that we have averted 23 lakh cases and 68,000 deaths. According to some retired scientists about 15.9 lakh cases and 51,000 deaths have been avoided, my ministry worked with Indian Statistical Institute and found 20 lakh cases were averted,” said Srivastava. “The way we are opening up economy, the way people are sensitised, it will have significant impact,” he added.
In a country of over 1.15 lakh coronavirus infections, the serene and calm islands of the union territory (UT) of Lakshadweep remain an outlier with no positive cases so far. Nagaland and Sikkim are the two other Covid-free states.
Health officials of the UT, whose 64,000 population is highly dependent on Kerala for their medical needs, attribute the success so far to early preparedness, mandatory testing of its residents and strict quarantine. The achievement is especially remarkable as there had been constant movement of people and essential supplies between Kerala and the islands till mid-March.
It was only rational for the UT authorities to test and treat them in Kerala as the islanders anyway depend on the state for treatment of advanced and critical medical cases. Health officials also utilised the initial few weeks of the lockdown to spread awareness among the remote inhabited parts of the islands about the virus and ramp up health facilities in case of an accidental transmission.
 Reserve bank of India Governor Shaktikanta Das (Express Photo by Prashant Nadkar)
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) on Friday slashed its key policy rates to stabilize the financial system and tackle the economic fallout from the ongoing nationwide lockdown to contain the spread of the coronavirus pandemic. The RBI panel unexpectedly cut the repo rate by 40 basis points to 4 per cent and the reverse repo rate by 40 basis points to 3.35 per cent. In another significant move, the RBI also announced extension of moratorium on loan repayments by another three months to August 31.
What will be the impact of rate cut?
