Coronavirus outbreak: China delaying evacuation of Indians from Wuhan, says Indian Embassy
India Saturday alleged that China was delaying granting permission to bring back nationals from coronavirus-hit Wuhan, PTI reported quoting the Indian embassy.
“We are continuously pursuing with the Chinese authorities, necessary clearance for the relief flight at the earliest. The Chinese side has not yet given these clearances despite being requested to do so,” the embassy note said.
A government official, earlier today had alleged that flights from other countries like Japan, Ukraine, France were allowed to operate between February 16 and 20, however, India’s request had not been approved yet.
The embassy note assured Indian nationals stuck in Wuhan that they would be intimated as soon as they receive any information from the Chinese side.
The latest jibe comes a day after China denied India’s allegation of delay in allowing a special Indian flight to deliver medical supplies. Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Geng Shuang had told a press briefing Friday that competent departments on two sides were still in communication regarding the arrangement for the remaining 80 people to be evacuated.
Urging Indians to take care of their health and get adequate rest, the note further stated: “As mentioned earlier, if you are facing any problems related to the availability of food or water or any other issue at your place of residence, do let us know by messaging Embassy officials directly and we will pursue it with the relevant Chinese authorities.”
Noting that some people might be “getting apprehensive due to the delay,” the note which was circulated through group chat according to PTI, also urged them to stay calm and wait for further updates.
“Please note that we will give you all at least four hours notice to get ready before the arrival of vehicles for pickup,” it added.
On February 17, India had announced that it will send Indian Air Force’s largest plane C-17 Globemaster with medical supplies to Wuhan, the epicentre of Covid-19.
Earlier this month, India had operated two special Air India flights to Wuhan and evacuated 647 Indians and seven Maldivians.
(with PTI inputs)

