Coronavirus April 28 Highlights: Cases in USA cross 1-million mark
The number of confirmed US coronavirus cases neared 1 million on Tuesday even as some states eased restrictions aimed at fighting the pandemic battering the economy. Meanwhile, Russia has extended the nation’s partial economic shutdown through May 11 as its total coronavirus cases reached 93,558 with 867 deaths.
Meanwhile, the total number of infections rose to 29,974 while the death toll crossed the 900-mark to reach 937 on Tuesday. In a press briefing, the Health Ministry said the plasma therapy for COVID-19 is one of the therapies being experimented with but there is no evidence for its use as a treatment. Health Ministry Joint Secretary Lav Agarwal said that in the last 24 hours, 1,543 new cases of the coronavirus were detected in the country, of which 684 cases were cured. The recovery rate is now at 23.3 per cent with 7,027 people recovered so far, he added.
Patients with mild coronavirus symptoms can now stay in home isolation, according to the new guidelines by the Health Ministry. As per the new guidelines, medical officers can recommend home isolation to those patients who have been clinically categorised as a very mild case or pre-symptomatic case, provided they have the requisite self-isolation facility at their residence so as to avoid contact with other family members.
Follow Indian Express COVID-19 tracker for latest updates
On the global front, over 3 million people have been infected from the novel coronavirus ever since its emergence in China last December, while 2,11,167 people have died. The United States continues to be the worst affected, with over 990,135 cases and over 56,144 deaths. The country has recorded 1,303 deaths in the last 24 hours. After the US, Spain reported 2,29,422 infections followed by Italy (1,99,414), France (1,62,220), Germany (1,58,142), the United Kingdom (1,54,038) and Turkey (110,130). (Click here to follow our coverage of Covid-19)

Chief Minister Amarinder Singh on Tuesday spoke to Punjab’s Congress MLAs through a video-conference about the state’s Covid fightback and said that certain relaxations in curbs were in the offing, but without lowering the state’s guard.
Amarinder informed MLAs that the Centre had indicated, based on various inputs and studies, that the rising trend in COVID-19 cases was likely to continue till July, a government statement said. Read More
With 26 more people infected with COVID-19 being discharged on Tuesday from the Nagarwada red zone, the total number of recoveries in Vadodara has reached 88.
The recovery rate of 34 per cent — 263 positive cases have been recorded until Tuesday — appears to be a progress for the city, but officials are preparing a “Covid army” to offer support in case of a possible community transmission.
The “Covid army” which includes at least 5,000 school teachers will be prepared for the third phase of fighting the pandemic, expected to begin from June 1. Read More
Weather does affect viruses and their transmission, but data recorded over an year must be studied to assess if heat has any effect on coronavirus, said M Rajeevan, secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences.
Since the outbreak of coronavirus, it has been repeatedly debated whether hot, humid and high temperatures could kill the virus, thereby slowing down the rate of infection. Read More
The number of coronavirus cases in the United States of America has crossed the 1-million mark, AFP quoted Johns Hopkins University as saying. 
The 20-member taskforce constituted by Punjab government to devise an exit strategy from the lockdown has suggested a phased easing out from the cubs, while expressing concerns over the state’s low testing rate and its alleged ill-preparedness to deal with a spike in cases as per a Niti Aayog projection.
Headed by former Chief Secretary K R Lakhanpal, the task force, in its 46-page report, has said: “The testing for COVID-19 even in big districts like Amritsar, and Patiala is quite low. Overall, probably because of various constraints and factors beyond control of the state, only 9,000 tests have been done. Currently, the state has only 25,000 RT-PCR test kits. The current daily testing capacity for RT-PCR tests is 1,200 tests only and is being increased to 2,000. One lakh Rapid Testing kits had been planned, but ICMR has suspended their use.” Read More
Close to 50 per cent of the 210 procurement centres run by Cotton Corporation of India (CCI) have resumed their operations, allowing farmers to sell their produce at the government-declared Minimum Support Price (MSP) of Rs 5,550 per quintal. Chances of private ginners actively procuring from farmers are slim given the headwinds the industry is facing of late.
The coronavirus (COVID-19) crisis and the subsequent lockdown has brought CCI’s MSP procurement operations to a standstill. Gin and press owners had taken a stance not to restart their operations in view of labour issues as well as fear of the infection. Read More
The Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) shifted more than 1,200 persons, including women and children, from a COVID-19 hotspot in the city to an institutional quarantine.
The operation in Satranjipura area in east Nagpur was started late on Monday night and went on till Tuesday morning. The area has been the focal point for civic and police administration ever since the first coronavirus-related death was reported there on April 5. The deceased, a 68-year-old man with several comorbidities, had no travel history and was later found to have come in contact with the friend of one of his sons-in-law, who had links with the Tablighi event in Delhi. Since then, the number of cases in the NMC area has gone up to 80. Read More
In densely-populated hotspots of Pune, where aggressive imposition of curfew continues, police teams are going beyond the call of duty to help affected people, and they are being aided by citizen volunteers, NGOs and technology-based solutions.
A large number of densely-populated areas in the centre of Pune, many of which are slum areas, remain some of the worst-affected parts of the city with increasing cases of COVID-19 infections. Read More
“If Vivian had to be buried, he would have to be buried at home — in Mizoram.” Raphael AVL Malchhanhima’s voice, from a quarantine centre in Aizawl, does little to give away the ordeal of the past few days — the sudden demise of his best friend, and the journey which followed: a 3,345-km road trip from Chennai to Aizawl, with two Tamil drivers, and the mortal remains of his friend.
But now that it is over, and his friend Vivian Remsanga has been laid to rest, Malchhanhima is tired, barely able to keep up with his buzzing phone. “I am getting so many messages from people. But I just want to say that I did this for my friend. And for everyone in Mizoram,” says the 23-year-old from Mizoram, who moved to Chennai in 2015. Read more here
A police constable deployed on Covid-19 lockdown duty came to the rescue of a seven-year-old snakebite victim at Badlapur in Maharashtra’s Thane district, police said on Tuesday.
Shivam Jadhav was bitten by a snake at a cattle shed near his home in Mankavli and his father was trying to find means to get him to a hospital during the lockdown, an official said. The boy’s father approached constable Girish Sahil, who was deployed in the area to enforced the lockdown, he said, adding that the policeman immediately rushed the child to a hospital on his two-wheeler. Read more here

The top Democrat in the US Senate warned on Tuesday that state and local governments will see “massive” layoffs if Congress fails to act soon to provide financial assistance to help them combat the effects of the coronavirus outbreak.
“There’s going to be massive layoffs at the state and local level unless we get money to them quickly,” Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer told MSNBC in an interview.
Schumer also called for new oversight hearings on President Donald Trump’s coronavirus response when lawmakers return to Washington next week. Top administration officials should face “tough question after tough question,” he said, on issues ranging from problems with Paycheck Protection Program assistance to small businesses to the status of efforts to provide testing.
Some children in the United Kingdom with no underlying health conditions have died from a rare inflammatory syndrome which researchers believe to be linked to COVID-19, Health Secretary Matt Hancock said on Tuesday. Italian and British medical experts are investigating a possible link between the coronavirus pandemic and clusters of severe inflammatory disease among infants who are arriving in hospital with high fevers and swollen arteries.
Spain’s daily death toll fell to 301 today, far below record highs of three times as much in early April. The health ministry said the total fatalities since the start of the outbreak rose to 23,822, with the daily increase coming down from Monday’s 331 and also well below record highs of over 900 earlier in the month. The number of diagnosed cases rose to 210,773 from 209,465 on Monday.
This will allow the government to set a framework for regions to start phasing out the lockdown which was put in place on March 14. On Sunday, children under 14 were granted one hour of daily supervised outdoor activity.

France is planning to ease its coronavirus lockdown from May 11 to avoid an economic meltdown, Prime Minister Edouard Philippe said, adding caution that infections would spiral higher again if the country moved too swiftly. In an address to the parliament, he said schools will gradually reopen and businesses will be free to resume operations. However, restaurants and cafes will remain closed until at least early June and professional sports, including soccer, will not begin again until the autumn. “A little too much carefreeness and the epidemic takes off again. Too much prudence and the whole country buckles,” the PM said.
More than 23,000 people have died in the pandemic in France, the world’s fourth-highest toll behind the United States, Italy and Spain.
Total active coronavirus cases in Pune rise to 1,057.
In @PMCPune on apr 28 till 7pm: 2 #coviddeaths , 73 critical, 122 new #Covid_19 patients, 27 #coronafree discharge. Total active 1057 patients @IndianExpress@ExpressPune#PuneFightsCovid19 #Covid_19india #StayAwareStaySafe #CoronainMaharashtra
The Panchkula police came knocking on the door of a 69-year-old on Tuesday. They were on a special, secret mission – to deliver a birthday surprise for the Sector 7 resident.
The resident, identified as Karan Puri, owns a famous book shop at Panjab University of Chandigarh, and lives in Panchkula alone. In the heartwarming video released by the police on Twitter that soon went viral, a team of women personnel can be seen wishing him and singing for him as he bursts into tears. Read the full story here
In #Lockdown, this senior citizen got a birthday surprise from Panchkula Police. pic.twitter.com/1LRHUR5HTL
The number of confirmed US coronavirus cases neared 1 million on Tuesday and the projected American death toll rose in a closely watched academic model, even as some states eased restrictions aimed at fighting the pandemic battering the economy.
With President Donald Trump's economic adviser forecasting an unemployment rate of more than 16% for April and many Americans chafing under stay-at-home orders, about a dozen states were moving to restart their battered economies despite a lack of large-scale virus testing.
Public health experts have warned that a premature rollback of social distancing policies aimed at curbing the spread of the pathogen could cause a surge in new infections.
Texas Governor Greg Abbott said on Monday he would let the state's stay-at-home order expire and begin reopening businesses including restaurants and retail shops in phases beginning on Friday.
The governors of other states including hard-hit New York have put off the reopening of businesses out of concern they might fuel a second wave of infections. (Reuters)
Kerala Tuesday reported four more positive cases of COVID-19 of which three cases are from Kannur district and one case from Kasaragod, taking the total aggregate in the state to 485.
Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan said four cases were cured in the state and currently 123 are under treatment in various hospitals.
Press Meet on #COVID19. Live from Kerala Government Secretariat. https://t.co/yKIf28GEQm
"Out of the four new cases, two came from abroad and two are contacts of infected people," Vijayan said.
Two patients each from Kannur and Kasaragod were cured.
"As of now, there are 20,773 under observation while 518 are in isolation wards across the state. A total of 23,980 samples have been sent for testing till now," Vijayan told reporters.
He said the state had randomly collected 875 samples from health workers, guest workers and people with more social contacts and sent for testing, out of which 801 returned negative. Vijayan also said that on Monday alone, the state had collected 3,101 samples and tested in the 14 labs across the state and 2,682 samples were found negative.
"Three of today's positive cases are from this set of samples...25 samples have been given for re-testing," Vijayan said.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi Tuesday held conversation with his Canadian counterpart Justin Trudeau and discussed the collaboration and partnership between the two countries in fighting the coronavirus pandemic including through medical research and supply chain management.
Had a warm exchange with PM @JustinTrudeau. Thanked him for looking after Indian citizens in Canada in these difficult times. Collaboration and partnership between India and Canada is vital to fighting the pandemic including through medical research and supply chain management.
Over 3,800 fishermen from Andhra Pradesh, who were stranded in Gujarat over the last one month due to the coronavirus lockdown, will be sent back to Visakhapatnam in 67-odd buses, covering 2,200 kilometres, officials said.
“The state government will be dispatching 3,862 fishermen from Andhra Pradesh today and tomorrow in 67-odd buses hired specially for this purpose. They will be undertaking a two day-long journey to Visakhapatnam,” Manish Bharadwaj, Secretary, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries Department told The Indian Express.
The first lot of fishermen left Veraval in 27 buses on Tuesday evening. A medical check-up of the fishermen was done before they boarded the buses, officials said.
 Prime Minister Narendra Modi during interaction with CMs.
Following Monday’s meeting of Chief Ministers with Prime Minister Narendra Modi, sources have told The Indian Express that the lockdown will be extended in hotspots, while restrictions will be eased in districts not affected by the infection. Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik wanted the lockdown to be extended by one more month. According to sources, Patnaik, who led the chorus for extension of lockdown, said it should be stretched to June 3. Sources said at least two states backed him.
According to an official note, Prime Minister Modi underlined that the lockdown has yielded positive results as the country has managed to save thousands of lives in the past one-and-a-half months. Pointing out that India’s population is comparable to that of the combined population of several countries, Modi said that the country could protect its people because of the timely measures. “However, he forewarned that the danger of the virus is far from over and constant vigilance is of paramount importance,” a source said.
Meanwhile, the Supreme Court has asked the government to respond in one week on whether the matter of inter-state transport of migrant labours was being examined. The apex court said this while hearing a plea by advocate Prashant Bhushan, where he asked the court to allow inter-state movement of the migrants, remarking that the state government seemed to have closed its eyes on the matter.
 The Centre is planning extension of the Covid-19 lockdown in major hotspots across the country. (Express photo/Pavan Khengre)
Also, Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh said that former prime minister Manmohan Singh has accepted his request for guiding a group of experts formed to come out with a post-COVID-19 revival strategy for the state.
Around 350 members of the Tablighi Jamaat, who had come to Delhi to attend its congregation in Nizamuddin Markaz last month and were subsequently diagnosed with coronavirus, have agreed to donate their plasma to treat severely ill patients in the city. So far, 25 of them have donated for plasma therapy.
 Of the over 2,300 people evacuated from the Nizamuddin Markaz, 1,080 had tested positive for the infection.
Senior officials in the health department said those who have come forward to donate their plasma recovered from COVID-19 at the Sultanpuri and Narela quarantine centres. On Monday night, Delhi Health Minister Satyendar Jain also visited these patients at the quarantine centre.
The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has asked all states and Union territories (UTs) to return the rapid test kits procured from two companies in China as they have shown “wide variations in sensitivity”. The kits were to be used only for surveillance and not for diagnosis, but that too stands suspended now.
 Coronavirus LIVE updates: The kits were to be used only for surveillance and not for diagnosis, but that too stands suspended now.
Facing questions on the pricing of these kits, the ICMR also issued a clarification stating that it has “not made any payment whatsoever”, and the “Government of India does not stand to lose a single rupee”.
Also Read:
States guarded on lifting lockdown, want clarity on movement of workers
Explained: Why rapid tests are off, again
In war room, 5 teams of doctors, data analysts keep watch
