Coronavirus June 23 Highlights: INS Airavat arrives in TN with nearly 200 Indians from Maldives
India Tuesday reported 14,933 new cases of the novel coronavirus and 312 deaths. This takes the country’s Covid-19 tally to 4,40,215, including 1,78,014 active cases, 2,48,190 recoveries and 14,011 deaths. Meanwhile, eleven districts in Guwahati – comprising large parts of the city – are set to undergo lockdown from 9 pm today to contain the rising Covid cases in Assam.
Telangana, which recently increased testing, is seeing a surge in its cases. Maharashtra has the most infections (1,35,796). Delhi has overtaken Tamil Nadu to become the second worst-hit state with 62,655 cases against the latter’s 62,087.
The Centre, in a fresh push to promote Make in India products, has made it made it mandatory for sellers to enter the country of origin while registering new products on Government e-Marketplace (GeM), a special purpose vehicle under the Ministry of Commerce and Industry that connects buyers and sellers. Products already available on GeM must meet the new requirement or risk being removed.
Meanwhile, the Trump administration has suspended some work visas, including the H-1B and H-2B visas, till the end of the year. It has also decided to restrict Air India’s repatriation flights citing “unfair and discriminatory practices”. Globally, the infections crossed the 9 million-mark on Tuesday. (Click here for global coronavirus updates)

Ahead of the second phase of re-openings in the region, four civic commissioners from the Mumbai Metropolitan Region, at the epicentre of the pandemic, were transferred Tuesday following a fresh surge in novel coronavirus cases. Civic commissioners of Thane, Navi Mumbai, Mira Bhayander and Ulhasnagar municipalities were transferred by Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray. Read More
On Tuesday, Assam reported 203 new COVID-19 cases taking the state’s total tally to 6056. Earlier in the day 197 patients were discharged taking the total number of recoveries to 3762.
“With this we have reached an impressive recovery rate of 64.3 %,” said Health Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma on Twitter. The state has tested 3.23,258 people in its 12 labs so far. Since a number of the new cases are from capital Guwahati city, parts of the city (on the basis of wards) have been put under total lockdown from today for 14 days. Assam currently has 2282 active Covid cases.
On Tuesday, Assam reported 203 new COVID-19 cases taking the state’s total tally to 6056. Earlier in the day 197 patients were discharged taking the total number of recoveries to 3762. “With this we have reached an impressive recovery rate of 64.3 %,” said Health Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma on Twitter. The state has tested 3.23,258 people in its 12 labs so far. Since a number of the new cases are from capital Guwahati city, parts of the city (on the basis of wards) have been put under total lockdown from today for 14 days. Assam currently has 2282 active Covid cases.
With twenty three more people testing positive of COVID-19 in Tripura today, the state's coronavirus tally now rests at 1,264 cases. Out of them, 482 are active patients while 782 others have already recovered and were discharged from hospital.
In a late evening Tweet today, Chief Minister Biplab Kumar Deb wrote, "Out of 975 samples tested for COVID-19, 23 people found POSITIVE. All of them have travel history & 1 is truck driver. The count includes : Sepahijala: 9 South: 5 Dhalai: 4 Khowai: 2 Gomati: 1 North: 1 West: 1 #TripuraCOVID19Count".
According to latest reports, 6400 persons are still under surveillance for coronavirus in Tripura, out of which 853 are admitted in different quarantine centers and 5547 others are under home quarantine.
Arunachal Pradesh reported 10 new Covid cases on Tuesday, taking the total tally of the state to 158. The new cases are from people who have returned to the state from Uttar Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Bihar, Maharastra, Assam, West Bengal, Manipur and Delhi. All ten but one are asymptomatic. As per a release by the Directorate of Health Service, 16 cases were released on Tuesday, after testing negative. Currently Arunachal Pradesh has 120 active cases, out of which 2 are symptomatic. (Express Web Desk)
Indian Naval Ship (INS) Airavat reached Tuticorin in Tamil Nadu on Tuesday afternoon with 198 Indians from Male in Maldives under 'Operation Samudra Setu', said the Navy on Tuesday. 'Operation Samudra Setu' was initiated by the Indian Navy on May 8 to bring stranded citizens from abroad. 
The Navy, in a press release, said, "The evacuees were received by local authorities at Tuticorin and arrangements were in place for speedy disembarkation, health screening, immigration and transportation of the evacuees."  "INS Airavat, deployed by the Indian Navy for 'Operation Samudra Setu', entered Tuticorin harbour early morning today, Jun 23, 2020 with 198 Indian nationals embarked from Male, Maldives," it added. Till date, the Indian Navy has brought back 2,386 Indians from Maldives to India under this operation. (PTI)
An estimated 120 million children living in South Asian countries, including India, could slip into poverty within the next six months due to the COVID-19 crisis, taking the total number of such kids in the region to 360 million, according to a new UNICEF report.
The report — Lives Upended – How COVID-19 threatens the futures of 600 million South Asian Children — covers eight South Asian countries namely Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, Nepal, Bhutan, Bangladesh, the Maldives and Sri Lanka.
With the government approving rapid antigen detection test for Covid-19, the PMC has decided to carry out a test for one lakh citizens residing in the containment zones for faster identification of infected persons from large populations and check the spread of disease.
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has approved the rapid antigen test for Covid-19 and negotiated the price at Rs 450 per kit with the SD Biosensor company. It has approved it for municipal corporations for mass testing in containment zones.
“The PMC is facing an emergency situation due to the outbreak. It is necessary to procure Standard Q Covid-19 antigen detection kit immediately. It is impossible to purchase the kit through the tender process due to time constraints, so it has to be purchased at the rate decided by ICMR and make it available for testing in civic hospitals and containment zones. A total of one lakh kits will be purchased for Rs 4.5 crore,” said Municipal Commissioner Shekhar Gaikwad. Read more here
Delhi records biggest single-day spike of 3,947 fresh Covid-19 cases, taking tally to over 66,000; death toll rises to 2,301. (PTI)
For the first time in living memory, the gigantic chariots of Lord Jagannath and his celestial siblings rolled on the streets of Puri on Tuesday, a pale shadow of the grand spectacle, with the pilgrim town under curfew and the sea of devotees missing.
The annual chariot festival, which in normal times attracts lakhs of devotees from across the world, was held "smoothly and peacefully", a day after the Supreme Court modified its earlier order and cleared the decks for the yatra, an emotive issue for Hindus in several parts of the country.
Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik, who refrained from visiting Puri and witnessed the proceedings on television, thanked people, particularly the servitors, Puri district administration, health and police officials for the conduct of the event. (PTI)
Eleven more people succumbed to the COVID-19 in West Bengal on Tuesday, taking the death toll due to the disease to 580, while confirmed coronavirus cases reach 14,728 with 370 fresh infections, a state health department bulletin said.
Nine of the 11 deaths were due to co-morbidities where COVID-19 was incidental, it added.
The number of active cases now stand at 4,930. (PTI)
Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Tuesday countered Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal's claim over a new COVID care facility being set up in the national capital, saying a decision for a?10,000-bed care centre to be operationalised by June 26 was taken three days ago.
In a series of tweets, Shah also said that a 1,000-bed full-fledged hospital with 250 ICU beds is being developed for COVID-19 patients and the facility, to be manned by armed forces personnel, will be ready in the next 10 days.
"Dear Kejriwal ji, It has already been decided in our meeting 3 days back and MHA has assigned the work of operating the 10,000 bed COVID Care Centre at Radha Swami Beas in Delhi to ITBP. The work is in full swing and a large part of the facility will be operational by 26th Jun," he said.
Shah's counter came after Kejriwal wrote to him inviting him to inspect the 10,000-bedded centre and requested him for deployment of doctors and nurses from ITBP and Army at the Centre. (PTI)
In Tamil Nadu 2,516 Covid-19 cases reported today, taking the infection count to 64,603. With 39 deaths today, the toll rose to 833 in the state. Of the fresh infections, Chennai accounted for 1,380 cases taking its total to 44,205.
2,516 #COVID_19 cases reported in Tamil Nadu today, taking the infection count to 64,603. With 39 deaths today, the toll rose to 833 in the state. Of the fresh infections, Chennai accounted for 1,380 cases taking its total to 44,205. @IndianExpress
Karnataka reported 322 new Covid-19 cases on Tuesday. With this, the total number of positive persons in the state has gone up to 9,721. It includes 150 deaths and 6,004 discharges.
Karnataka reported 322 new #COVID19 cases on Tuesday. With this, the total number of positive persons in the state has gone up to 9,721. It includes 150 deaths and 6,004 discharges. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/WJOl36fodl
The Bombay High Court on Tuesday directed the Central Government to file an affidavit indicating the steps taken by Western and Central Railway to convert coaches into isolation or quarantine centres and why ICU facilities in coaches are not considered necessary.
A division bench of Chief Justice Dipankar Datta and Justice M S Karnik heard through video conference public interest litigation (PIL) by one Naresh Kapoor filed through advocates Prerak Choudhary and Jigar Kamdar raising various concerns and reliefs in view of Covid-19 treatment.
The PIL sought that all hospitals, nursing homes, and dispensaries, which are presently closed either due to departmental orders or judicial orders, should be re-opened to meet the needs of patients who have tested positive for Covid as well as patients suffering from other ailments. (reported by Omkar Gokhale)

Novak Djokovic tested positive for the coronavirus on Tuesday after taking part in a tennis exhibition series he organized in Serbia and Croatia.
The top-ranked Serb is the fourth player to test positive for the virus after first playing in Belgrade and then again last weekend in Zadar, Croatia. His wife also tested positive.
"The moment we arrived in Belgrade we went to be tested. My result is positive, just as Jelena's, while the results of our children are negative," Djokovic said in a statement.
Djokovic has been criticized for organizing the tournament and bringing in players from other countries amid the coronavirus pandemic. (AP)
Karnataka govt announces cap on Covid-19 treatment rates in private hospitals -- Rs 5,200 to Rs 10,000 for those referred by public health facilities and Rs 10,000 to Rs 25,000 for patients admitted directly. (PTI)
Priyanka Gandhi Vadra served notice over alleging high Covid mortality rate in Agra
The Agra administration on Tuesday served a notice to Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra after she alleged that 28 coronavirus patients died within 48 hours of hospitalisation in the city.
Tagging a media report, the Vadra had on Monday tweeted that 28 coronavirus patients died within 48 hours of hospitalisation in Agra. She had described it as a "matter of shame" for the Uttar Pradesh government, accusing it of suppressing the truth.
Calling the information shared by Gandhi as "misleading and false", Prabhu Narain Singh, District Magistrate Agra, asked her to take back her claim in 24 hours as it may negatively impact the common public as well as Covid-19 warriors. (reported by Maulshree Seth)
As against the global average of 6.04, India has one COVID-19 death per lakh population which is one of the lowest in the world, the Union health ministry said on Tuesday, and credited timely detection of cases, extensive contact tracing and effective clinical management for the low mortality rate.
Till date, 14,011 people have died in India due to the viral infection with 312 fatalities reported in 24 hours till Tuesday 8 am, while 14,933 new instances of the disease took the total caseload to 4,40,215.
Citing WHO Situation Report 154 dated June 22, the ministry said the United Kingdom has registered 63.13 coronavirus-related fatalities per lakh population, while in Spain it is 60.60, Italy 57.19, the US 36.30, Germany 27.32, Brazil 23.68 and Russia 5.62.
"In India, early detection of cases, timely testing and surveillance, extensive contact tracing coupled with effective clinical management have helped to check case mortality," the ministry said in a statement.
This is also a testimony to the graded, pre-emptive and pro-active approach the Centre along with the states and Union Territories have taken for prevention, containment and management of COVID-19, it said.
"The recovery rate continues to improve and it is 56.38 per cent as on date," the ministry said. (PTI)

A man walks past a wall painted with anti-spitting and maintain cleanliness slogans in the times of coronavirus pandemic in Mumbai. (Express Photo by Amit Chakravarty)
 A civil defence worker hands over a pulse oximeter to two people in New Delhi on Saturday. (Express Photo: Praveen Khanna)
Coronavirus India News Live Updates: In other news, the Centre said it would reimburse in full those who had applied to travel to Saudi Arabia to perform Haj this year. Saudi Monday announced it would allow a “very limited number” of people due to the coronavirus.
Meanwhile, the country’s top drug regulatory body, the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO), on Saturday granted emergency use approval to two Indian drugmakers for generics of Gilead Science’s remdesivir, The Indian Express has learnt. These approvals will allow Cipla and Hetero Drugs to manufacture and supply the injectible medicine for the treatment of suspected or laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19 “with severe disease”, ending weeks of uncertainty over where they can access the drug from.
Drug Controller General of India Dr VG Somani approved these applications late on Saturday, said a senior Health Ministry official on condition of anonymity. The companies will have to follow the same conditions set out by the DCGI for Gilead when its remdesivir was approved at the beginning of the month.
Even as the Covid-19 pandemic has set off an unprecedented response from the global scientific community to find a vaccine, according the World Health Organization’s latest count, 13 experimental jabs are being tested in humans and more than 120 others are in earlier stages of development.
Biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies, including AstraZeneca Plc and Moderna Inc, have been ramping up production and promising supplies of millions of doses of their experimental vaccines before the year end.
 Doubling rate in Dharavi slum now longest in Mumbai. (Express Photo)
