Industries set to employ 7.5 lakh workers, says UP govt
The Uttar Pradesh government on Wednesday said that it would soon be able to provide employment to 7.5 lakh workers in the state as it is preparing to sign Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Indian Industries Association (IIA) and National Real Estate Development Council (NAREDCO). While the MoU with IIA will help in giving jobs to about 5 lakh migrant workers in different MSME units, the MoU with NAREDCO will pave the way for 2-5 lakh people to be employed in real estate.
Notably, NAREDCO had written to the UP government earlier this week,  saying that it could offer jobs to migrant workers if the state government formulates a law to provide assistance to the sector and help restart stalled projects.
A UP government spokesperson on Wednesday said that the government would enter into an agreement with these two agencies to help identify the places of job demand and categorise the workers. These agencies would also ensure that labourers get employment as per the requirement, the spokesperson said, adding that the agencies would also ensure short-term training of the workers and arrange apprenticeship or training to unskilled labourers in industries.
The government assured that arrangements would be made to provide apprentice fee to workers during their training period.
On Sunday, the UP government had announced setting up of a migrants commission to facilitate the employment of migrant workers returning to the state. Till Wednesday, the government said nearly 25 lakh migrant workers had returned to the state since the coronavirus-induced lockdown was imposed across the country in March.
The commission has also been tasked with the skill-mapping of workers. So far, the government’s database suggests that the biggest chunk of migrant workers have the skill of working in real estate – around 1.5 lakh, followed by furniture technicians (26,989), building decorators (26,041), home decorators (12,633), drives (10,000), IT and electronic technicians (4,680) among others.
On Wednesday, the UP government said that industrial units have sought “skill mapping data bank” to assess their employability.
During a high-level meeting of “Team 11”, formed to look into different aspects of the problems caused by coronavirus pandemic, Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath asked officials to conduct a survey and mapping of industrial units in the state so that manpower demands could be met accordingly.
As per the district-wise database, while maximum labourers —nearly 1.47 lakh — have returned to  Siddharthnagar district in east Uttar Pradesh, other districts with large numbers of returned migrant workers include Bahraich (around 80,000); nearly 68,000 in Saharanpur, over one lakh in Mahrajganj district, around 78,000 in Gonda, about 63,000 in Sant Kabir Nagar, about 67,000 in Balrampur district, 55,000 each in Jaunpur and Hardoi, about 47,000 in Sultanpur, about 35,000 in Ayodhya among others.
During the meeting, Adityanath urged the MSME department to contact industrial units so that migrant labourers who have returned can be provided employment.
He also asked officials to act as a link between the migrant labourers and industries. Uttar Pradesh is already in the process of forming a commission for migrant labourers.
Additional Chief Secretary Awanish Kumar Awasthi said the Chief Minister had instructed CM helpline officials to prepare a separate system to contact each and every migrant labourer who has returned to the state and get feedback on their skills so that the databank is completed as soon as possible.

