Coronavirus outbreak Highlights: New virus has infected more than 14,550 globally
Coronavirus outbreak Highlights: Hours after three patients were admitted to SMS Government Hospital in Jaipur Sunday, PTI reported that they have been tested negative for the novel coronavirus. “All three have tested negative for coronavirus,” Dr DS Meena,” Superintendent of SMS Hospital was quoted as saying. The viral outbreak that began in China has infected more than 14,550 people globally.
India on Sunday temporarily suspended e-visa facility for Chinese travellers and foreigners residing in China. “Due to certain current developments, travel to India on e-visas stands temporarily suspended with immediate effect,” the Indian Embassy announced. “This applies to holders of Chinese passports and applicants of other nationalities residing in the People’s Republic of China. Holders of already issued e-visas may note that these are no longer valid,” the announcement said.
Three days after India’s first Coronavirus case reported in Kerala’ Thrissur, a second case has been reported in the state on Sunday. The patient is a student from Wuhan who returned to India on January 24 and has been kept in isolation for monitoring, Union Health Ministry said in a statement. At least 1,793 people are under surveillance at homes across Kerala and 70 have been admitted to isolation wards at hospitals.
The first death reported outside China came from Philippines, news agency AFP reported.

Mission complete! 110s time-lapse video shows the construction of Wuhan’s Huoshenshan Hospital from Jan 23 to Feb 2. pic.twitter.com/cIw7SjxqHx
A second French-chartered plane carrying 300 evacuees from China was flying to France on Sunday as more foreigners fled China's rapidly developing virus. The A380 is expected to land at the military base of Istres in the southern French region of Bouches-du-Rhone. A first plane landed Friday near Marseille.
Officials said none of the passengers on this plane from the central Chinese city of Wuhan had symptoms of coronavirus on leaving China. They include French, Belgians, Dutch, Danes, Czechs, Slovaks and some citizens of African countries. (AP) 
Several videos have appeared in social media about Pakistani students in Wuhan complaining about the failure of their government to evacuate them from ground zero of the novel coronavirus that has now infected over 14,000 individuals and killed more than 300.
This is happening even as India has flown out two planeloads of its citizens from Wuhan, and countries around the world are increasingly walling off China to contain the spread of the infection. READ MORE
Last week, Dawn quoted a senior aide to Prime Minister Imran Khan as saying: “We believe that right now, it is in the interest of our loved ones in China [to stay there]. It is in the larger interest of the region, world, country that we don’t evacuate them now". Read our Explained here
Maldives President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih on Sunday thanked India for expeditiously evacuating seven Maldivians from Chinese city of Wuhan, the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak, saying it was an example of the "outstanding" friendship and camaraderie between the two countries.
India has evacuated 647 Indians and seven Maldivian citizens by special flights from Wuhan city. Air India's jumbo B747 made two flights to Wuhan - the ground zero of the coronavirus epidemic. In the first flight on Saturday, 324 Indians were evacuated and on Sunday another 323 Indians and seven Maldivian citizens were flown back. (PTI) 
Pakistan said on Sunday that it had acquired nearly 1,000 coronavirus testing kits from its all-weather ally China to boost the country's capability of diagnosing the disease which has claimed over 300 lives. Special Assistant to Prime Minister on Health Zafar Mirza took to Twitter to share the development in the wake of concerns that Pakistan lacked capacity to test the deadly virus.
"We have now capability of diagnosing coronarivus in Pakistan. I want to applaud our NIH (National Institute of Health) leadership and team for their hard work in securing the reagent for diagnosing," Mirza tweeted
A plane repatriating 250 French and European nationals from China's Wuhan, centre of an outbreak of a new coronavirus, landed at a military airbase in Istres, southern France, on Sunday.  Many countries are working with China to repatriate citizens from Wuhan and the surrounding Hubei province. 
About 65 French nationals will be quarantined either at a holiday resort at Carry-Le-Rouet, in the south of France, or at a firefighters' training centre near Aix-en-Provence, Secretary of State for Child Protection Adrien Taquet told reporters. (REUTERS)
The Assam government on Sunday allayed the fears of people, following media reports, of a person admitted to a hospital here with coronavirus infection. Assam Minister of State for Health and Family Welfare Pijush Hazarika said the person, who recently came from Kerala, was admitted to Gauhati Medical College and Hospital for suspected coronavirus infection. "He was kept in isolation ward and given treatment. He is still in hospital and we are closely monitoring the situation," Hazarika said. (PTI) 
Pakistan said on Sunday that it had acquired nearly 1,000 coronavirus testing kits from its all-weather ally China to boost the country's capability of diagnosing the disease which has claimed over 300 lives. Special Assistant to Prime Minister on Health Zafar Mirza took to Twitter to share the development in the wake of concerns that Pakistan lacked capacity to test the deadly virus.
"We have now capability of diagnosing coronarivus in Pakistan. I want to applaud our NIH (National Institute of Health) leadership and team for their hard work in securing the reagent for diagnosing," Mirza tweeted. At least 1,000 testing kits arrived from China, boosting Pakistan's efforts to tackle the disease, the health officials said, adding that no Pakistani national has contracted the virus. (PTI) 
Three persons who were admitted to a hospital here have tested negative for the novel coronavirus, officials said on Sunday. They were admitted to the hospital on Saturday and were kept under observation. 'All three have tested negative for coronavirus,' Dr DS Meena,' Superintendent of SMS Hospital said on Sunday. (PTI)
Iraq has banned the entry of all foreigners coming from China over fears about the coronavirus outbreak, the interior ministry said on Sunday. China National Petroleum Corp (CNPC) is a top investor in Iraqi oil while the Chinese state-run CNOOC Ltd works at the Maysan oilfield in southeast Iraq.
China on Sunday resorted to more drastic measures like isolating coronavirus patients to designated areas and restricting the movement of residents in regions hit by the rapid spreading virus that has killed 305 people and infected over 14,000 others. The Philippines on Sunday reported the first death outside China from the deadly virus that has spread to 25 countries, including India, taking the total toll to 305.
The victim, a 44-year-old Chinese man, was the companion of a 38-year-old Chinese woman who arrived in the Philippines on January 21 from Wuhan, the epicentre of the virus outbreak.
Three persons suspected to have symptoms of coronavirus were admitted to SMS Government Hospital here, an official said on Sunday. “They were admitted to the hospital on Saturday. Their blood samples have been collected and the report is expected to come by Sunday evening,” Dr D S Meena, Superintendent of SMS hospital said.He added that the patients have been kept in isolation. Meanwhile, arrangements have been made in ESIC Medical College of Alwar for keeping nearly 300 Indians airlifted from Wuhan city of China where the international virus outbreak began. The batch of passengers are likely to reach Alwar on Sunday evening for quarantine.
Seven Maldivians were flown down to India from coronavirus-hit Wuhan in China along with 323 Indians in an Air India flight that landed at New Delhi’s Indira Gandhi international airport on Sunday morning.
Taking to Twitter, External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar said, “7 Maldivians brought back with 323 Indians from Wuhan on the second @airindiain flight today. #NeighbourhoodFirst at work again.” Air India has done such evacuations earlier also from countries such as Libya, Iraq, Yemen, Kuwait and Nepal.
7 Maldivians in #Wuhan are on their way to Delhi on a special #AirIndia flight. Upon arrival they will be housed in Delhi for a period of quarantine. Deep gratitude to PM @narendramodi and EM @DrSJaishankar. Special thanks to Ambassadors @VikramMisri @sunjaysudhir and their teams
India on Sunday temporarily suspended e-visa facility for Chinese travellers and foreigners residing in China in view of the virulent coronavirus that has killed more than 300 people, infected 14,562 others and spread to 25 countries, including India, the US and the UK.“Due to certain current developments, travel to India on e-visas stands temporarily suspended with immediate effect," the Indian Embassy announced here.“
Advisory:Due to certain current developments, travel to India on E-visas stands temporarily suspended with immediate effect. This applies to holders of Chinese passports and applicants of other nationalities residing in the People’s Republic of China.
This applies to holders of Chinese passports and applicants of other nationalities residing in the People's Republic of China. Holders of already issued e-visas may note that these are no longer valid," the announcement said.“All those who have a compelling reason to visit India may contact the Embassy of India in Beijing or the Indian consulates in Shanghai or Guangzhou, as well as the Indian Visa Application Centres in these cities," it said. (PTI)
Karnataka government officials Sunday dismissed claims that 19 people in Bengaluru's Wilson Garden area tested posivite for Coronavirus, after people began to widely share a fake news report on social media groups including WhatsApp. “Today's breaking news now...19 ppl r affected with CORONA VIRUS only in WILSON GARDEN Surrounding areas ...pls friends kindly update it to family and friends too.....all of us take care.....” a message that has been shared widely on social media, especially on WhatsApp, reads. 
Japan confirmed an additional three cases of the new coronavirus among evacuees from the Chinese city of Wuhan, including one who initially tested negative, the health ministry said on Saturday, bringing the country's total to 20 cases, reported Reuters.One of the three, a man in his 40s who had symptoms such as fever and coughing, first tested negative for coronavirus, the ministry said. But the man, who was initially diagnosed with pneumonia, later confirmed positive for the virus with an additional test, it said.
Shailaja said: "We have been informed telephonically by NIV Pune that there is a possibility of another positive case. But since there is a possibility we have to be extremely vigilant. We are yet to receive the results. The suspected case is of a student of Wuhan university."
As the second case of coronavirus surfaced in Kerala, the state health minister K K Shailaja addressed a press conference and said,  "The patient is stable and doing fine. The patients do not need to be shifted to Delhi. We have the best isolation facilities in Kerala."
Welcome to The Indian Express LIVE blog. Stay tuned for latest updates on coronavirus outbreak, and how India is dealing with it.
