Coronavirus August 1, Updates: At 2.15%, fatality rate lowest since lockdown, nearly 11 lakh people recovered
With India reporting 57,117 cases and 764 deaths in the last 24 hours, the total number of coronavirus infections reached 16,95,988 and toll rose to 36,511 on Saturday. Of the total, 5,65,103 are active cases and 10,94,374 people have been treated and discharged so far. The country’s total number of recoveries from COVID-19 has surged close to 11 lakh, while the case fatality rate has declined from 3.33 per cent in mid-June to 2.15 per cent, the lowest since lockdown was clamped in March, the Union Health Ministry said on Saturday.
Coronavirus India LIVE Updates: Nearly 55,000 new cases in India; tally crosses 17-lakh mark
Amidst a record surge in the number of novel coronavirus cases, Andhra Pradesh has ruled out the re-imposition of a lockdown and is insisting that a focus on testing will help contain further spread of the disease.
The third phase of unlocking restriction begins today. On Wednesday, the centre had announced guidelines for the same, removing night curfew and allowing yoga institutes and gyms to reopen from August 5. However, on Thursday, Tamil Nadu and Bihar extended the statewide lockdown till August 31 and August 16 respectively.
Meanwhile, Anthony Fauci, a top infectious disease expert in the United States, has said he was “cautiously optimistic” that a vaccine for novel Coronavirus would be a “reality” by the end of this year, or “as we go into 2021”.
Globally, over 17.5 million people (17,531,059) have been infected with the novel coronavirus, with 678,695 deaths so far. Also, as many as 10,272,824 people have been recovered. The United States with over 4.5 million cases and 1.5 lakh deaths is the worst-affected nation, followed by Brazil and India.

Delhi Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia on Saturday urged Union Home Minister Amit Shah to direct Lieutenant Governor Anil Baijal to allow hotels and weekly markets in the national capital to reopen under Unlock 3. It is beyond comprehension what the Centre wishes to achieve by keeping hotels and weekly markets shut in Delhi when they have been allowed to open in states with high COVID-19 caseload, Sisodia said in a letter to Shah. The deputy chief minister's letter comes a day after Baijal rejected the Arvind Kejriwal government's decision to allow reopening of hotels and weekly markets in the city under Unlock 3, saying the COVID-19 situation continues to be 'fragile' and the threat is still 'far from over'.
A 55-year-old Sub Inspector from Kerala undergoing treatment for COVID-19 died late on Friday after suffering a heart attack, making him the first casualty from the force in the state. V P Ajithan, who was attached to the Idukki special branch, was activelyengaged in Covid duty, a police press release said The SI, a diabetic and with a a heart ailment, was undergoing treatment at the Idukki medical college hospital after he tested positive. However, he was shifted to Kottayam Medical College hospital after his condition worsened, the release said.
He died at around 11.30 pm on Friday night after suffering a heart attack. The funeral of the officer was held this evening at Idukki with police honours. He leaves behind his wife and two children. In a Facebook post, DGP Loknath Behera condoled his death and said "losing a member of the family untimely is very sad and unfortunate. I only wish that other members of the Kerala Police family remain healthy and safe.
All help and assistance shall be provided to the family", he said. At least 108 police personnel have been infected by the virus so far and over 80 have been cured, police sources said. The DGP also issued guidelines stating that those aged over 50 years should not be put on Covid duty and must be assigned only station work. Those less than 50 years of age, but suffering from comorbidity issues also should not be assigned covid duties Senior officers should monitor the health of the policemen on duty,the DGP was quoted as having said.
Karnataka's COVID-19 tally rose to 1.29 lakh with the state on Saturday recording 5,172 fresh infections and 98 fatalities. The death toll mounted to 2,412 with the new fatalities. There were as many as 53,648 discharges including 3,860 on Saturday whereas there were 73,219 active cases in the state including 602 in the ICU, the department said in a statement. The spike in cases and deaths on Saturday was led by Bengaluru Urban district, which recorded 1,852 fresh cases and 27 deaths. The city has so far reported 57,396 cases and 1,056 deaths. There are 37,760 active cases including 338 in the ICU and 18,579 discharges including 1,683 in Bengaluru.
Abhishek Bachchan is a happy Chelsea fan as the actor has received a special letter from the football club, wishing him a speedy recovery from COVID-19. The 44-year-old actor, who is currently admitted to Nanavati hospital along with his father Amitabh Bachchan, shared the photo of the letter on Instagram. "This made my week. Thank you so much @chelseafc The only thing that would top this is winning the FA Cup this evening. Come on Chelsea!!! #ktbffh," Abhishek wrote in the caption. ln the letter, Chelsea captain Cesar" Azpilicueta said that he along with the players of the club were moved when they heard about what Bachchan testing positive for coronavirus. "We heard you aren't very well at the moment and just wanted to get in touch to wish you all the best. I know the players and I were very moved when we heard about what you have been going through and we just wanted to let you know that we are thinking of you and your family in what I can imagine are difficult times. "On behalf of all the players and everyone at Chelsea may I send you all our best wishes," Azpilicueta wrote in the letter
This made my week. Thank you so much @chelseafc The only thing that would top this is winning the FA Cup this evening. Come on Chelsea!!! #ktbffh @cesarazpi
A post shared by  Abhishek Bachchan (@bachchan) on Aug 1, 2020 at 12:23am PDT
For the first time since a spurt in COVID-19 cases, Tripura has registered more number of recoveries than fresh infections on a single day, a health official said on Saturday. While the state's COVID-19 caseload inched towards the 5,000-mark as 275 more people tested positive for the infection, a record 365 people were cured of the disease and discharged from various Corona Care Centres (CCCs) and District Corona Hospitals (DCHs) on Friday. The new cases have pushed the virus count in the state to 4,998, of which 3,327 people have been cured of the disease.

Forty-seven more people died from coronavirus in Uttar Pradesh on Saturday as 3,807 fresh cases took the state's infection tally to 89,068. So far, the infection has claimed 1,677 lives in the state, Additional Chief Secretary (Medical and Health) Amit Mohan Prasad told reporters on Saturday. The total number of COVID-19 cases in the state stands at 89,068, up from Friday's 85,261, Prasad added. Prasad further said 51,354 patients have been discharged after treatment, bringing the number of active cases to 36,037 in the state. He said 93,381 samples were tested on Friday. Till now, over 24.18 lakh samples have been tested in the state, he said.
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on Saturday said that Covid-19 Fatality Rate has come down to 2.15 per cent today. " It is the lowest since the first lockdown started. It has been continuously reducing from around 3.33% in mid-June," said the health ministry.
The total number of recovered cases is nearly 11 lakh. With 36,569 patients discharged in the last 24 hours, the total recoveries have jumped to 10,94,374. The recovery rate stands at 64.53% amongst COVID-19 patients
Two elderly people succumbed to Covid-19 in Puducherry, while 139 new cases were reported on Saturday. The Union Territory now has 3,593 cases of coronavirus, Director of Health and Family Welfare S Mohan Kumar said in a press release.
There are 1,357 active cases in the union territory now, while 2,185 have recovered from the infection. Nearly 39,707 samples have been tested so far.
Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik’s home district Ganjam became the first in the state to record over 10,000 cases of Covid-19, besides reporting 94 deaths, an official said on Friday. Following the detection of 368 new cases, the districts’ tally increased to 10,364. Further, four patients died during the day, he said.
Though Odisha’s first Covid-19 case was detected on March 15, Ganjam remained a green zone till the arrival of migrant workers, mostly from Surat in Gujarat. The district reported its first Covid-19 case on May 2 with two people who returned from Surat testing positive. About 3 lakh migrant workers have returned to the district, officials said.
Pune Mayor Murlidhar Mohol has alleged that at least 400 suspected Covid-19 deaths have gone unaccounted for in the city in July. Mohol said there were at least 400 to 500 deaths of suspected coronavirus patients are going unaccounted for in Sassoon General Hospital and private hospitals in the city.
“There are at least 12 deaths of suspected coronavirus patients that are going unaccounted for in Sassoon hospital daily. Similar cases are taking place in private hospitals also,” he was quoted as saying by PTI.
The Mayor said he raised the issue with CM Uddhav Thackeray on Thursday, when he took stock of the Covid-19 situation.
A senior official Saturday said the coronavirus-induced lockdown in the containment zones of Maharashtra’s Thane district has been extended till August 31. District Collector Rajesh Narvekar said in a video address that concessions granted to non-containment zones and the state government’s guidelines will be applicable to Thane rural, municipal council and Nagar Panchayat limits.
As many as 132 cases of coronavirus were detected from Majiwada-Manpada locality of Thane on Friday, deputy commissioner of Thane Municipal Corporation Sandeep Malawi said. Thane district has at least 85,956 Covid-19 cases, with 2,365 deaths.
The second round of sero-prevalence survey began in Delhi on Saturday, with the five-day exercise set to cover various demographic segments and all districts, news agency PTI reported. The exercise is being done as a part of a comprehensive assessment of the coronavirus situation in the national capital.
A senior government official told PTI 15,000 samples would be collected from August 1 to 5 as part of the exercise, spanning different areas and age groups. Representative samples will be taken from all 11 districts.
A sero-prevalence survey involves testing the blood serum to check for the prevalence of antibodies.
The last sero-prevalence survey was conducted by the Delhi government from June 27 to July 10. It found that around 23 per cent of the people surveyed had been exposed to the novel coronavirus. The survey had tested 21,387 samples.
Delhi Government begins monthly serosurvey in the city: Chief Minister's Office (CMO).
Delhi Government begins monthly serosurvey in the city: Chief Minister's Office (CMO) #COVID19 https://t.co/xCaTe6xofq pic.twitter.com/V37xrA3M4d
Telangana reported 2,083 new COVID-19 cases, the highest single day spike so far, breaching the two thousand mark for the first time, taking the tally of positive cases in the state to 64,786. With 11 more deaths, the COVID-19 toll in the state rose to 530, a state government bulletin said on Saturday, providing data as of 8 pm on July 31.
While the Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC), the epicentre of the virus spread in the state, continues to report a high number of cases, there has been a sharp rise in theinfections being reported from different districts, including Ranga Reddy, Medchal-Malkajgiri, Sangareddy, Warangal Urban and Karimnagar.
In a bid to prevent the spread of coronavirus infection among its medical staff, the state-run J J Hospital here has developed a transport chamber for contactless movement of COVID-19 patients within the premises. Developed by the general surgery department of the hospital with the help of engineers of a firm named Indomed Devices, the patient transport 'kavach' aims to reduce the risk of infection among the hospital staff, visitors and other patients.
Sanskrit word 'kavach' literally means an armour. "The cost-effective glass transport trolley has a HEPA filter at the head end, which filters out particles as small as 0.02 microns," said Amol Wagh, assistant professor of surgery at J J Hospital.
It has not opened its borders fully yet but the Andhra Pradesh government is now liberalising inter-state movement of people in tune with the Unlock 3.0 guidelines issued by the Centre. People coming into AP will now only need to register their details on the government's Spandana portal to obtain an entry pass, according to Principal Secretary (Transport) M T Krishna Babu.
The system would be operational from August 2 on spandana.ap.gov.in portal. "An auto-generated e-pass will be sent to the persons mobile as well as email. They can carry the auto generated e-pass along with a valid identity proof to get entry at the border checkpost," Krishna Babu, who is also the state nodal officer, said in a release.
All the states in the country need to emulate the "Delhi model" for controlling the spread of the coronavirus, Union Minister of state from Home G Kishan Reddy said here on Saturday.
"I am requesting the state government (Telangana) to focus on testing, tracing and treatment. There is a need to increase the number of tests (in Telangana). The more number of the tests, the faster the containment of the disease. You know, Delhi as a union territory I am personally monitoring. There is 84 per cent recovery rate in Delhi. All the states should emulate the Delhi model," he told reporters.
From chanting of 'Mahamrityunjay' mantra to offering special prayers at temples, people in parts of Goa have started seeking "divine intervention" in a bid to stop the spread of COVID-19 in the state, where the infection count has gone above 5,900 so far. The coastal state, which was declared a COVID-19 green zone on May 1, had started witnessing a spurt in the number of cases a few days after that.
The Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party (MGP), the oldest regional political outfit in the state, said it has organised chanting of 'Mahamrityunjay' mantra in temples across Goa against the pandemic. MGP leader and party MLA Sudin Dhavalikar said that this mantra would be chanted one lakh times in each temple across the state.
Should you get tested just to check your status?
It is not advisable – because the probability of being wrongly identified as Covid-19 positive is significant. When no test for the virus is 100% accurate, the key aspect to consider is the prevalence of the disease in the population that is being tested
If I test positive, do I have the disease?
The unequivocal answer to the question is: Maybe.
This uncertainty exists because few diagnostic tests are 100% accurate. The inaccuracy coupled with disease prevalence makes a positive result open to interpretation, and not a definite judgment on the health status.
With lockdown restrictions having eased to a large extent and most activities having resumed, the novel Coronavirus got almost unhindered opportunities in July to spread in the Indian population. The result has been that more than 11 lakh people were found to have been infected with the virus in July. That is almost double the number of infected people before that.
That has meant that, on an average, more than 35,000 people were added every day in the month of July to the confirmed number of infections in the country. In the last three days, this number has been more than 50,000, with each day recording a number higher than the previous day. Read More
 Coronavirus India LIVE updates: Delhi has conducted over 10 lakh coronavirus tests so far, nearly half of which were done in the last 30 days, data shows.
An expert committee on Friday recommended that Serum Institute of India be allowed to conduct late-stage human trials for the Oxford Covid-19 vaccine candidate in India after the Pune-headquartered firm revised its proposal, The Indian Express has learnt.
If the chief of India’s apex drug regulatory body signs off on this, Serum will be able to kick off the trials here, putting it ahead in India’s own race for a Covid-19 vaccine.
The development comes three days after the Subject Expert Committee (SEC) for Covid-related therapies on Tuesday recommended amendments to Serum’s earlier protocol to conduct the trials here. Serum has a tie-up with Swedish-British firm AstraZeneca, which developed the vaccine along with the University of Oxford, to manufacture this vaccine for low- and middle-income countries. Following these recommendations, the firm had speedily amended its proposal and resubmitted it, The Indian Express has learnt.
Maharashtra is worst-affected
Ever since the first infections in Maharashtra were detected in the second week of March, the state has been contributing the highest number of positive cases in the country. Even in the initial days, there were only a couple of occasions when other states –the outbreak was confined to Kerala, Delhi, Telangana and Rajasthan at that time – had reported more cases than Maharashtra, but those days daily new discoveries were still in single digits.
