Coronavirus highlights: Assam makes quarantine mandatory for returnees; Karnataka to open temples from June 1
 Coronavirus India News: The COVID-19 fatality rate in India is among the lowest in the world at 2.87 per cent, the government said on Tuesday, attributing the timely lockdown, early detection and management of coronavirus infection cases as the main reasons for the low death toll. From?3.38 per cent in April, the fatality rate in the country has come down to?2.87 per cent as against 6.4 per cent globally.

Addressing the press conference,  Lav Agarwal, Joint Secretary, Union Health Ministry, said ” India reported 0.3 per cent deaths per lakh population and the main reason for lowest fatality rate is  lockdown in the country and how India prepared for it.”
India registered 6,535 new cases in the last 24 hours, taking the country’s Covid-19 tally to 1,45,380 on Tuesday. This includes 80,722 patients with the disease, 60,490 who have been treated and discharged and 4,167 deaths. Assam has emerged as one of India’s fastest growing states, in terms of cases, as migrants return to their home towns.
Globally, nearly 5.5 million people have been infected with the novel coronavirus so far, including 3.4 lakh deaths.
In other news, taking suo motu cognisance of the plight of lakhs of stranded migrant workers across the country, the Supreme Court on Tuesday pointed out the “inadequacies and lapses” in the handling of the crisis and issued notices to the Centre and state governments on steps taken to “redeem the situation.”

The Gujarat government while defending itself in a civil application, seeking clarification on the Gujarat High Court (HC) order that had stated the Ahmedabad Civil Hospital was “as good as a dungeon…maybe even worst”, said its (Ahmedabad’s) Covid-19 situation was better than Italy and France which had populations comparable to Ahmedabad. Read more here
The Gujarat Medical Education Research Society (GMERS)-run Covid-19 hospital in Gotri area of Vadodara witnessed a power outage for more than 12 hours on Tuesday causing some anxious moments among relatives of patients who were on life support systems.
At least 12 Covid-19 patients were on oxygen support and six on ventilator support at the time of the outage, caused due to a transformer hitch. The power supply was restored at 7 pm. The outage caused most of the air-conditioning units in the Covid-19 Intensive Care Unit (ICU) to remain turned off. The Madhya Gujarat Vij Company Ltd (MGVCL) officers said that the fault had arisen in the internal transformer of the hospital, leading to a day-long outage. Read more here
Pharmaceutical company Glenmark is set to commence a phase-3 clinical trial to study the efficacy of a combination of Favipiravir and Umifenovir drugs to treat Covid-19. The trial, which will involve 158 Indian patients, is the second trial to start in the country using Favipiravir.
The combination of the drugs will be used to check whether duration of viral shedding can be shortened. Viral shedding, which usually occurs before or at the onset of symptoms, means the virus is expelled from the body and can potentially infect others. Read more here
A 56-year-old fireman from Mumbai Fire Brigade succumbed to Covid-19 on Sunday. This is first such death reported from the fire brigade. So far, 35 fire brigade staffers have tested positive for coronavirus across the city.
The deceased, who was being treated for typhoid and dysentery, was posted at Gowalia Tank Fire station on Grant Road and was involved in fumigation and disinfection activities. He had been on leave since May 16 due to his illness. Read more here
On the second day after Mumbai airport resumed restricted operations of domestic flights, 41 flights were operated by six airlines to 13 locations. Of this, 22 departed from the city and 19 arrived, ferrying a total of 4,224 passengers comprising 3,114 departing and 1,110 arriving fliers. Most passenger load continued to be for departures to Delhi. Read more here
The Thane Municipal Corporation (TMC) on Tuesday ordered a complete lockdown of Mumbra from May 27, allowing only milk and medical shops to remain open. The area has reported 298 Covid-19 cases so far.
“There has been a substantial increase in the number of Covid-19 cases in Mumbra. Inspite of the lockdown, people are crowding at shops and vegetable markets. Social distancing norms are not being followed…,” the circular issued by TMC said. Read more here
The war of words between the Maharashtra government and Union Railway Minister Piyush Goyal over Shramik special trains continued Tuesday, with the latter claiming that only a fraction of the 145 trains scheduled from Maharashtra could depart because of the state’s lack of preparedness.
The state government Monday evening had submitted a requirement of 145 trains to the Railways, including the details of passenger and their destinations. Based on the list, the Railways had scheduled as many trains to leave Tuesday from across Maharashtra. Of these 145 trains, 120 trains were from Mumbai Metropolitan Region (MMR) alone. Read more here
In the first case of Covid-19 at a children’s institution in the city, two children and a staffer were infected at the Dongri home this month. While two patients have since recovered and been discharged, a 15-year-old girl is undergoing treatment at St George’s Hospital.
A 17-year-old boy, apprehended by the police in a sexual assault case, was the first person to be detected positive for the virus at the centre. Sent to the observation centre following the orders of the Juvenile Justice Board on May 6, the boy had first developed a fever and cough, and subsequently made to undergo tests. Read more here
Fourteen personnel from the Pune-based unit of the State Reserve Police Force (SRPF) tested positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday, taking the total number of cases in the Maharashtra SRPF above 520.
Two companies of the Pune-headquartered ‘Group 2’ of the SRPF — comprising around 100 personnel each — had been deployed in Mumbai. They returned to their base in Pune on May 21. While all of them were kept in quarantine as a precautionary measure after arrival, their swab tests were also conducted. Read mroe here
A 24-YEAR old passenger on board IndiGo’s Monday flight from Chennai to Coimbatore tested positive for Covid-19 upon arrival at Coimbatore, following which the airline’s operating crew has been quarantined for 14 days. According to health officials, he was asymptomatic before boarding and was tested along with all passengers at the airport upon arrival on Monday evening. Read more here
Pune district recorded nine deaths from Covid-19 on Tuesday, taking the toll to 289. As many as 327 new positive cases were also recorded, with the total number of cases at 6,480.
Divisional Commissioner Deepak Mhaisekar said an analysis of deaths shows that almost 89 per cent patients had co-morbidities, and there was an urgent need to bring down the mortality rate. Read more here
The Bihar government on Tuesday said it was committed to bringing back all its people stuck in different places in the country, and would not prevent any trains from coming into the state. It said the Maharashtra government was free to send as many trains as are required to let interested people travel to Bihar. Read more here
The Karnataka government Tuesday said temples in the state could be reopened from June 1. The final decision, however, will be taken after the Centre releases its guidelines once the fourth phase of the lockdown is over on May 31.
Temples in Karnataka have been closed for more than two months now, due to the ongoing Covid-19 lockdown.
If they open on June 1, temples will have to follow a standard operating protocol (SOP) across the state. Read more here
Senior leaders of Gujarat Congress including state president Amit Chavda visited the Ahmedabad Civil Hospital on Tuesday morning to interact with doctors and other medical staffers. Later, they attacked the BJP-led state government over the issue of ‘fake ventilators’ and the rise of Covid-related deaths.
Chavda, president of Gujarat Pradesh Congress Committee (GPCC), alleged that doctors at the civil hospital have clarified that Dhaman-1 ventilators, which were recently gifted by a Rajkot-based businessman to the hospital, were not actually ventilators. A controversy had emerged after senior doctors at the civil hospital had claimed that Dhaman-1 is not leading to desired results. Read more here
Hours after eleven Covid-19 cases were identified in Tripura on Tuesday evening, 23 more persons tested positive for the coronavirus.These new cases have raised the state's total tally to 232.
In a late evening tweet, Chief Minister Biplab Kumar Deb wrote, "More 23 people found COVID19 #POSITIVE in Tripura today. Among them 18 people have come from Maharashtra by train & 5 others were in contact of Positive patients. Positive Cases : 232. Active Cases : 65. Discharged : 165. Migrated : 02 #TripuraCOVID19Count".
With 118 fresh cases reported on Tuesday, Assam’s Covid-19 tally reached 666. The maximum number of cases — 48 — were reported from the Golaghat district. Others were from across the state, including Nagaon, Karbi Anglong, Goalpara, Lakhimpur, Morigaon, Kamrup (Metro). The state has seen a spike in cases in the last week as residents have returned from other states. State Health Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma took to Twitter to state that all the cases were recent, imported and not reported within the quarantine centres. “All swaps were collected prior to quarantine. We have seen no spike inside quarantine centre . We are going to follow ruthless quarantine to prevent social transmission,” he wrote. The state currently has 597 active cases, and reported four deaths.
The Tata group’s Indian Hotels Company (IHCL) will continue to provide meals to medical professionals for another month, a statement by the company said Tuesday.
According to the statement, “The Taj Public Service Welfare Trust is distributing nutritious meals to medical staff in key hospitals/COVID-19 centers in Mumbai, Bengaluru and New Delhi. We have partnered with Chef Sanjeev Kapoor for Mumbai, Bangalore and New Delhi for this initiative. In partnership with Tata Sons, TPSWT is providing meals to migrant workers in Mumbai. This is also handled by TajSATS.”

Puneet Chhatwal , Managing Director and CEO, IHCL, said: “Now, after nearly 1.6 million meals distributed, we at IHCL have decided to continue offering the initiative for another month.”
Apart from meals, 11 IHCL hotels across the country are offering rooms for the medical fraternity – they are Taj Lands End, Taj Santacruz, The President and Ginger Andheri East in Mumbai; Ginger Madgaon; Ginger City Centre, Noida; Ginger New Delhi Rail Yatri Niwas; Ginger Kalinganagar; Ginger Manesar; Ginger Surat and Vivanta Guwahati.
The Bombay High Court on Tuesday sought to know from the state government whether Covid-19 testing facilities are available in each district of Maharashtra and inquired if mobile clinics can be started across the state.
A division bench of Chief Justice Dipankar Datta and Justice K K Tated was hearing a plea filed by a fisherman seeking proper testing facilities in Ratnagiri, a non-red zone, in the light of thousands of stranded migrant workers returning home in the district from red zones such as Mumbai and Pune.
On May 22, the HC had directed Government Pleader Priyabhushan Kakade to respond to the petition. The state on Tuesday submitted that due measures are being taken to test suspected persons and sought two days’ time to take instructions from the authorities to file a reply. Read more here
Asymptomatic passengers who want to enter Haryana after landing at IGI airport, Delhi and Mohali Airport, Punjab will be permitted to leave the airport with the advice that they shall self-monitor their health for 14 days, the state government has said. As per the guidelines issued by the Haryana government, In case, they develop any symptoms, they shall inform the District Civil Surgeon/ District Control Room/ the State/ National Health call centre (1075) immediately”.
Haryana has also asked the concerned airport Authorities to “provide the details of the symptomatic passengers to the nodal officer and also e-mail the details of such passengers at four e-mail ids provided by the state government; upon receiving such information, the health teams of the concerned district shall follow the protocol defined by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India and Government of Haryana regarding Covid-19”.
An Air India staff on Ludhiana- Delhi flight tested positive on Monday after the government resumed flight operations.
#Punjab: A security staffer of @airindiain who had come via Ludhiana-Delhi flight at Sahnewal airport on Monday, tests positive for coronavirus in Ludhiana. @iepunjab @IndianExpress
 Pune Mahanagar Parivahan Mahamandal Limited (PMPML) Swargate set to start its services in Pimpri-Chinchwad and suburban areas outside Pune city limits with 50 per cent capacity (Express Photo: Pavan Khengre)
Most of the state governments decided to put the passengers arriving from other states in an institutional quarantine of seven to 14 days. Others made home quarantine for a fortnight mandatory for the travellers. Despite being vocal against the resumption of domestic flights, Maharashtra — which is worst hit by Covid-19 — allowed Mumbai airport to handle 50 domestic flights per day.
Meanwhile, MoHFW made it mandatory for stranded Indians arriving from abroad to check into institutional quarantine for 14 days at their own expense, followed by seven days of home isolation. Specifying guidelines for the international arrivals, the ministry said that before boarding, all the travellers would have to give an undertaking that they would stick to the above rule to ensure least chances of transmission.
Exceptions will be given in a few cases — human distress, pregnancy, death in family, serious illness and parents accompanied by children below 10 years of age. They will be asked to self-isolate at home for 14 days.
All passengers arriving would also be advised to download Aarogya Setu app on their mobile devices. At the time of boarding the flight or ship, all the asymptomatic travellers would be allowed to board after thermal screening. A list of dos and don’ts would also be provided along with the ticket by the agencies they were travelling with.
 A woman and her daughter at Guru Nanak Dev Stadium in Ludhiana for screening before boarding train from railway station.
Cansino Biologics claims success in human trials; Indian vaccine unlikely in a year
Days after US biotechnology company Moderna Inc reported successful results from its experimental vaccine for Covid-19, a second breakthrough has been made in China, with Cansino Biologics Inc saying the vaccine appeared to be safe and might protect people from the novel coronavirus.
Coming to India, PTI reported experts were of the view that research in the country on a Covid-19 vaccine was still at a nascent stage and any concrete breakthrough was not likely within a year. Presently, while Zydus Cadila is working on two vaccines, Serum Institute, Biological E, Bharat Biotech, Indian Immunologicals, and Mynvax are developing one vaccine each.
India coronavirus numbers explained: Slowdown in some trouble spots
