Returnee from Delhi among 3 new Covid-19 cases in Himachal
Three more persons tested positive for COVID-19 in Himachal Pradesh Wednesday, taking the total number of cases to 46 in the state. While two persons tested positive in Chamba district, one tested positive in Kangra district.
Chamba Deputy Commissioner Vivek Bhatia said that two persons tested positive in the district are from Khad Jota panchayat in Salooni subdivision and had came from Baddi in Solan district. Their contacts are being traced and they will be quarantined as per protocol, the DC added.
Earlier, a 38-year-old man, a resident of Jamanabad in Kangra district, had tested positive, Superintendent of Police Vimukt Ranjan said.
Kangra DC Rakesh Prajapati said the man was quarantined at Panchayati Raj Training Institute (PRTI) in Baijnath after he had been tested positive at Dr Rajendra Prasad Government Medical College (RPGMC) in Tanda. The man returned from Dubai last month and subsequently came to his house in a taxi from Delhi with three other persons on April 27. The taxi driver has also been identified.
The DC said the quarantined man’s 24 contacts were identified. They have been quarantined and their samples have also been taken for testing, Prajapati added.
Meanwhile, one more person who had been staying at Gagret in Una district tested positive in neighbouring Jammu and Kashmir. A resident of Jammu, the man had returned to the Union territory a few days ago and was tested positive at Lakhanpur, Una Deputy Commissioner Sandeep Kumar said.
The district administration received information from Lakhanpur that the man had been tested positive for coronavirus, the DC said. His contacts in Una district have been quarantined, he added.
Earlier, one of the patients, a 21-year-old man from Sarkaghat in Mandi, died of renal failure Tuesday. DGP SR Mardi said that three people who came along with him have been placed under institutional quarantine and their samples taken for testing.
As per the officials, nearly one lakh persons have arrived in the state from all over North India after the Himachal government allowed their entry on April 26. Most of the returnees have been asked to observe quarantine at home.
The state government is also bringing back people stranded elsewhere in HRTC buses. Chief minister Jai Ram Thakur said that 22 students from Varanasi are expected to arrive on Thursday. The state government has also started an online portal on which people stranded in other states and also people from other states stranded in Himachal can apply, seeking transport and journey permit. Officials said that they are engaged in talks with governments and local administrations of various states and UTs and are trying to bring back people in a staggered manner.
Meanwhile, six people from Himachal Pradesh who were stranded in Nagpur reached Chandigarh on Wednesday after walking and hitchhiking for the last 10 days. The six of them reached the Himachal Bhawan in Sector 28 where they have been provided shelter, and will now be brought back home by the state government, officials said.

