Telangana: KCR announces Rs 5 crore, land, job for Colonel wife
Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrashekhar Rao on Friday announced Rs 5 crore compensation to the family of Colonel B Santosh Babu, who was killed in the Galwan Valley clash.
The CM also announced a residential plot and Group 1 Job for his wife. He also said that he will personally go to the Santosh Kumar’s house and hand over the help. KCR also said the Telangana government would give Rs 10 lakh to the families of each of the other 19 soldiers killed in the clash through the Union Defence Ministry.
“The entire country should stand by the military personnel guarding our country’s borders. We have to support those martyred in their line of duty and help their family members. With such acts, one should instil self-confidence among the army personnel and security to the family members. We have to send a message that the entire country is with them. The Central government extends help to those martyred. But the states should also to extend their help. It is only then that the army personnel and their family members would have confidence that the country is standing by them. Exhibit the symbol of unity. Though there are problems with the coronavirus, one should cut expenditure somewhere and work for the welfare of the defence forces,” the CM said this while interacting during Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s videoconference.
The CM also said that there should not be any hastiness following clashes that have arisen between Indo-China armies at the border. However, there is no need to bow our head as far as our country’s interests are concerned. The CM suggested to the PM to pursue long-term and short-term strategies to counter China. He also made it clear that the state government would stand by the central government on this issue. KCR said that what we require now is Ran neethi (War strategy) but not Raj Neethi (Political strategy/Politicisation), adding that China became jealous that there is stable and strong governance in India and the country is becoming a very strong economic force to reckon with and hence the provocation from its side.
Expressing his views as president of the TRS, KCR said, “China and Pakistan have the habit of creating trouble and conflict atmosphere when they have problems internally. China has a lot of internal problems now. China is also picking up confrontation with countries in the South China Sea coast like Japan, Malaysia, and Philippines. China has become very unpopular in the world.”
“China had always been pursuing confrontation attitude with India. Galwan-like incidents have also happened in the past. This is not the first incident nor will it be the last. China raised border dispute in 1957. In 1962, there was a full-scale war between India and China. Then 200 defence personnel were killed. Now clashes took place at Galwan and 20 of our army personnel lost their lives. We have to act strategically,” the CM said.
“There are special factors behind China adopting a confrontation with India now. We have brought in new Acts for Kashmir. We are providing permanent solutions to problems there. We are speaking decisively on the POK. Our Union Minister had declared in the Parliament that Aksai Chin is our area, which China occupied illegally. Galwan Valley is strategically important strategic point for the country’s security. We are improving infrastructure facilities there. China is not able to digest these. Hence it is taking a confrontation position,” the CM added.
“We are a peace-loving nation. At the same time there is a limit for our patience. We have to give a befitting reply if anyone crosses our path. Don’t compromise on nation’s security and interests. At this juncture, there is no need for politicisation. We need a war strategy. The entire country should stand as one. In the past, whenever we had skirmishes with other countries, we all stood together. We have the experience of Indo-China war, Indo-Pak war and the Bangladesh war. In 1970 Bangla Desh wartime, Vajpayee praised Indira Gandhi as Durga Mata. Such kind of inspiration should come to us now. The entire country should stand by the Central government and the Prime Minister. People in Telangana State, the state government will stand by the PM in this situation,” the CM said.
“We are desiring Atma Nirbhar Bharat (Self-reliant India), while China wants us to be Anya Nirbhar Bharat (Indian dependent on others). China is unable to tolerate our growth and progress. India is emerging as one of the strongest economies. The US is economic superpower with 21 trillion dollars economy while China is second with 14 trillion economy. India is marching towards 5 trillion economy. China is upset with this. China is unable to tolerate a stable government and sustained economic growth in India. Hence China is creating these problems,” the CM said.
“China became unpopular as it was considered to be responsible for the spread of coronavirus. Several multi-national corporations are shifting out of China. They are now looking at India. According to the World Bank report, India went up from 142 position to 63 position in ease of doing business. In India, investor-friendly policies are being implemented effectively. Foreign Direct Investments are also on the increase. From 2014 to 2017, the FDI was increased from 36 billion dollars to 61 billion dollars. There is a possibility of a further increase in FDIs. Several people are ready to shift their companies from China to Telangana state. China is not happy with this,” he added.
KCR also said, “There are opinions that say we should ban import goods from China. It will be a hasty decision. The goods that we are importing now should be made in India. These goods should be available to the people at reasonable costs. We have to concentrate on this.”
“We should prepare long-term and short term strategies to face China’s aggressive attitude. There should not be any hasty act under any circumstances. At the same time, there should not do any compromise as far as our nation’s security and interests are concerned. We should have a strategic partnership with countries, which are friendly with us. Join the D group as suggested by the UK. Join the Oran alliance. Repel the Huawei Company’s strategy. We have to act with strategy,” KCR said.

📣 The Indian Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel (@indianexpress) and stay updated with the latest headlines
