Coronavirus India Updates, 02 June: Instead of using the word ‘community transmission’, need to know extent of Covid spread, says ICMR
Responding to a question on whether certain areas have entered the community transmission phase, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) scientist Nivedita Gupta on Tuesday said, “Instead of using the word community transmission, it is important to understand the extent of spread of the disease and where do we stand in comparison with other countries.”
She said that the ICMR is conducting a sero-survey to assess the extent of spread of COVID-19 and almost 34,000 people are being tested as a part of it, adding that its results will be out in the public domain by the end of this week or early next week.
Days before, some of the country’s prominent public health and community medicine experts, including two members of an ICMR research group on covid-19, have criticised the government’s handling of the pandemic and the lack of epidemiologists in decision-making. “It is unrealistic to expect that COVID-19 pandemic can be eliminated at this stage given that community transmission is already well-established across large sections or sub-populations in the country,” read a joint statement by Indian Public Health Association, Indian Association of Preventive and Social Medicine and Indian Association of Epidemiologists.
Addressing a press conference, Gupta also said that India is “very far away from the peak”.  “Our preventive measures to curtail the disease are very effective and we are better positioned in comparison with other countries. You will get to see the data in a week,” she added.
Health Ministry Joint Secretary Lav Agarwal said till now, 95,527 patients have recovered while the recovery rate has improved to 48.07 per cent. He also said it is wrong to just look at the total number of cases and state that India has the seventh highest number of cases as the population of countries also should be taken into account.
The novel coronavirus death toll rose to 5,598 in India on Tuesday with 204 more fatalities, while 8,171 new cases took the number of infections to over 1.98 lakh, the Health Ministry said. The active cases of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) climbed to 97,581 and as many as 95,527 people have recovered and one patient has migrated, according to the data.
Tamil Nadu, which has been contributing the largest number of new cases after Maharashtra for the last few days, has now tested more than 5-lakh people, becoming the first state to do so. Rajasthan, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Jammu and Kashmir are some of the other states with a good record on testing. Meanwhile, Prime Minister Narendra Modi Tuesday said India will get its economic growth back as the government continues to pursue various reforms. Speaking at industry association CII’s annual session, he said “On the one hand we have to save the lives of our people and on the other hand we have to stabilise the economy and speed it up”. Follow coronavirus LIVE UPDATES
Make sure you carry your Aadhaar card when you go for the long-needed haircut and other services at beauty parlours, spas and salons that have opened across Tamil Nadu as part of the relaxations under ‘unlock 1’ starting June 1.
According to the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) issued by J.Radhakrishnan, Commissioner of Revenue, details of a customer, including their name, address, phone number, and Aadhar card, have to be noted by the owners of spas, salons and beauty parlours to ensure contact-tracing in view of Covid-19
These places are also required to keep hand sanitizers at their entrances and the tissues used by the customers as well as the workers have to be disposed of safely.
Domestic air travel in the country is picking up the pace as 692 flights carrying 64,651 passengers operated on June 1 against 501 flights with 44,593 flyers the day before, Civil Aviation Minister Hardeep Singh Puri said on Tuesday.
Domestic services in India were suspended in March due to the coronavirus lockdown and resumed on May 25.
“Jump in the number of flyers from 44,593 on 31 May to 64,651 on 1st June is a welcome sign that our domestic operations are picking pace. Departures 692,” Puri said on Twitter.
Indian carriers operated a total of 4,062 flights till June 1 — 428 on May 25, 445 on May 26, 460 on May 27, 494 on May 28, 513 on May 29, 529 on May 30, 501 on May 31 and 692 on June 1. (PTI)
Guidelines for ‘Unlock 1’ in Gurgaon:
* Offices can work with full strength
* No restrictions on intrastate movement
* Interstate movement to be regulated
* RWAs can’t prevent people from performing permitted duties/movement into or within societies
* Hotels, religious places to be closed
‘Unlock 1’ in Gurgaon-offices can work with full strength;no restrictions on intrastate movement;interstate movement to be regulated;RWAs can’t prevent people from performing permitted duties/movement into or within societies;hotels,religious places to be closed. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/a7zlZSNQcR
— Sakshi Dayal (@sakshi_dayal) June 2, 2020
Due to the proactive measures taken by the state government, coronavirus is under control in majority of the districts, Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami said Tuesday. He said the opposition leader is making false allegations, while the government is taking all measures to contain the spread of the virus.
Speaking to the reporters in Chennai, Edappadi, who was accompanied by Health Minister C Vijayabaskar and other higher officials, said, “Except, in areas like Chennai, Tiruvallur, Kancheepuram, and Chengalpet, the situation is under control in the state. In today’s meeting with higher authorities, we discussed the various measures to control the spread in Chennai. The spread of the disease is higher in slums in Chennai because of the cramped houses. More tests are done, close to 13,000 are done on a daily across the state and 4,000 in corporations. People even with slightest symptoms are tested and their contracts are traced in quick time,” he said.
Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal assured people not to worry about medical care even as the number of coronavirus infections are increasing in the national capital. “We have made arrangements for sufficient beds, oxygen cylinders, ventilators. From the experiences of other countries, we have realised that most of them are falling short of hospital infrastructure. Despite having enough arrangements as of now, we get calls about inadequate beds, oxygen cylinders. There’s an information gap. This is why we have come up with this app to provide you with information regarding hospitals in Delhi,” he said.
Their numbers might not be very big as of now, but the northeastern states reported a big surge in the novel Coronavirus cases on Monday. Tripura added more than 100 cases in a single day, while the number of infections in Arunachal Pradesh increased from 4 to 20, and that in Manipur from 78 to 83.
Assam and Tripura have been the most affected states in the region. Assam, in fact, is one of the fastest growing states in the country right now.
India’s top drug regulatory body on Monday approved the use of the antiviral medication remdesivir for the treatment of suspected or laboratory-confirmed cases of Covid-19 in adults and children hospitalised “with severe disease.
Remdesivir is one of the most closely watched drugs in the global clinical trials to find a cure for Covid-19.
US pharma giant Gilead Sciences have been granted marketing authorisation for remedesvir drug from India’s drug regulator for “restricted emergency use” on hospitalised coronavirus patients. The approval process for remdesivir was accelerated in view of the emergency situation and the unmet need for medicines in light of the coronavirus outbreak, PTI reported.
From today, migrants returning to Bihar will not be registered or quarantined, the government has decided. Those who returned to the state till Monday had been registered and quarantined in more than 5,000 centres, which together host around 13 lakh migrants. These centres will be closed after June 15, when the 14-day quarantine of the last batch of registered migrants ends.
Thermal screening at railway stations is also set to be discontinued, but there is to be a medical desk at every station to facilitate treatment to those unwell.
As the migrant exodus from urban centres continues towards rural areas within Maharashtra, 17 districts that had zero or very few cases are witnessing a sudden spike in Covid-19 cases. A gradual shift of Covid-19 cases from urban to rural regions is taking place. People travelling from Mumbai, Pune, Thane and Malegaon have been the main source of infection in other districts in the state. Till April 30, Mumbai and Pune, the two Covid hotspots, accounted for 78.4 per cent of total cases in Maharashtra. Their share had reduced to 70 per cent by May 31.
With further lifting of lockdown restrictions and partial resumption of train services, Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Monday ordered strict patrolling by police in markets and parks and on highways to ensure that people adhere to the social distancing norms and wear masks all the time while they are out in order to contain the spread of coronavirus.
He also directed officials to ensure thermal scanners are available at all railway stations in the state.
Uttarakhand Chief Minister Trivendra Singh Rawat and three other ministers who were part of a meeting attended by Cabinet colleague Satpal Maharaj went into home quarantine on Monday. Tourism minister Satpal Maharaj, who tested positive on Sunday, attended the meeting in the Secretariat on Friday in which 20 people were present.
Sources said the chief minister’s office in the Secretariat has been sanitised and sealed.
The state owned Odisha State Beverages Corporation Limited (OSBC) has developed an online portal for the smooth interaction of liquor retailers and consumers in response to the massive demand for home delivery of liquor in Odisha.
The portal was launched to further streamline the process and to bring convenience to consumers and retailers as well as for the purpose of transparency and building accountability in the whole process, an official of Odisha State Beverage Corporation (OSBC) said.
Cabinet Minister Nitin Gadkari on Monday said that migrant workers are coming back as industries have started opening up with social distancing norms. The Union Minister for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, and Road Transport and Highways, said the country has to learn the “art of living with coronavirus”.
However, the minister did not specify the number of jobs lost due to the pandemic and the lockdown. Responding to a question regarding the impact on employment across industries, Gadkari said, “There has not been any official analysis of (the number of jobs lost) due to the Covid problem,” but Covid has “definitely impacted it”.
In a interview with Th Indian Express, Piyush Goyal, Minister of Railways, Commerce and Industry, said,”Despite the global economy being stressed, global value chains coming under severe pressure, trade wars among countries and continents, despite the uncertainties which characterised the whole year in terms of economic growth, international trade, India was able to find a reasonable path, but for the coronavirus which literally from January started showing the impact on the economy.” Read full interview here

