Coronavirus Updates, 09 June: India better positioned in fight against Covid-19 but no space for complacency, says Health Minister
India Coronavirus Latest Update: India is better positioned in the fight against COVID-19 compared to other countries but there is no space for complacency, Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan said on Tuesday as the death toll due to coronavirus infection rose to 7,466 and the cases mounted to 2,66,598 in the country. While India is the 5th worst-hit COVID nation, Maharashtra — with over 88,000 infections — has more cases than China.
Vardhan chaired the 16th meeting of the high-level group of ministers on COVID-19 which reviewed the containment strategies pertaining to the pandemic via video-conferencing, the health ministry said. The GOM was briefed about the latest status, response and management of COVID-19 in the country. “India is better positioned in fight against Covid-19 compared to other nations, “but there is no space for complacency,” Vardhan strongly reiterated. He also reminded everybody to download Aarogya Setu app which will help in self risk assessment and in protection against Covid-19.
Monday saw a sharp decline in the number of new cases of novel Coronavirus infections, and the reason is not very clear right now. But the big difference was made by a reduction in the number of unassigned cases. These are the cases that no states were owning up, and these had been rising rapidly over the last few weeks. By Sunday, this number had gone up to 8,605. On Monday, however, this number reduced to 7,837, meaning at least 768 of these cases have finally been assigned to some state or the other. But it is not clear which states have these been assigned to. None of the states have shown any unusual rise in their numbers on Monday.
Follow Coronavirus India LIVE updates
A Delhi government panel has suggested turning Pragati Maidan, Talkatora Stadium, JLN Stadium and Indira Gandhi Indoor Stadium into make-shift facilities to accommodate the estimated surge in Covid-19 cases.
PTI reported that the panel, constituted by Lt Governor Anil Baijal, has also suggested using Thyagaraj Indoor Stadium and Dhyanchand National Stadium for the purpose.
Earlier in the day, Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia said there might be 5.5 lakh Covid-19 cases in the city by July 31 and 80,000 beds would be needed. “We expect around 44,000 cases in Delhi by June 15, 1 lakh cases by June 30, 2.5 lakh cases by July 15, and 5.5 lakh cases by July 31,” Sisodia said. Delhi would need 80,000 beds by July-end, he added.
2,259 new coronavirus patients were found in Maharashtra on Tuesday, taking the tally of cases to 90,787, a health official said. The death toll due to the pandemic reached 3,289 with 120 deaths being reported during the day, he added. 1,663 patients were discharged from hospitals after recovery, taking the total of recovered patients to 42,638, the official said.
The National Disaster Response Force has decided to provide a set of five PPEs to each of its personnel involved in any rescue operation during the time of COVID-19, officials said Tuesday, a day after 51 jawans on cyclone ‘Amphan’ duty tested positive for the virus.
NDRF Director General (DG) S N Pradhan also said immunity-boosting medicines and homeopathy preparations as mandated by the AYUSH Ministry are also being given to personnel of the force. “In certain cases, as per medical advice, the troops may be given HCQ (Hydroxychloroquine) tablets too,” he said.
46 new patients tested positive with COVID-19 in Mizoram on Tuesday. This has been the highest number of COVID cases found in a single day in the state even as the state government imposed a total lockdown for two weeks since last midnight to arrest spread of the virus.
With these new cases, Mizoram now has 88 COVID-19 cases, out of which 87 cases are active. The Department of Information and Public Relations informed this afternoon that 29 samples were tested positive at Zoram Medical College (AMC) laboratory. They include sixteen males and thirteen females. 28 of them are from Lunglei District while one is from Lawngtlai district. All the patient are between ages 18 to 28.
Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal tested negative for novel coronavirus on Tuesday, confirmed AAP MLA Raghav Chadha on Twitter. “CM @ArvindKejriwal tests negative for Covid-19. Thank god,” Chadha said.
The 51-year-old AAP supremo underwent the test for coronavirus earlier in the morning. Kejriwal had gone into self-quarantine on Sunday after he developed a sore throat and fever.
“CM is a little unwell. He has developed mild fever and a sore throat. So he has self-isolated himself. Since Sunday afternoon, he has not received any guest or official,” a party functionary had said.
BJP leader Jyotiraditya Scindia and his mother Madhavi Raje Scindia have been admitted to a private hospital in the national capital after the two showed Covid-like symptoms.
Max Hospital in Saket, where the two have been admitted, is yet to issue a statement in connection with their health condition.
Meanwhile, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, who has been self-isolating after developing mild fever and sore throat, got himself tested for COVID-19 today. The chief minister has avoided meetings and visitors since Sunday afternoon, an AAP spokesperson said. The test report is expected later in the night or by Wednesday morning.
Lufthansa group has offered to fly empty planes to India and carry passengers only on its outbound flights to destinations in Europe, senior government officials said on Tuesday. Scheduled international passenger flights have been suspended in India since March 23 due to the coronavirus pandemic. Therefore, there is a pent up demand for outbound international travel to some countries, especially among non-resident Indians (NRIs) who are in a hurry to go back either for personal or professional reasons, according to aviation industry experts.
“Lufthansa group (which operates airline brands like Lufthansa, SWISS, etc) have offered to fly ferry (empty) flights to India and carry passengers only on its outbound flights to destinations in Europe. A decision is yet to be taken on this matter,” said a senior government official.
It has been more than two weeks since domestic flight operations began and over a week since most of the long-distance train services resumed, but some states continue to revise quarantine guidelines as arrivals increase from hotspot areas.
While Kerala has given relief to returning expats from mandatory institutional quarantine, Delhi has shortened the mandatory home quarantine period by 7 days.
All air, rail and bus passengers arriving in Delhi will now have to stay in home quarantine for a week. This includes those who are asymptomatic. All international passengers will have to undergo 7 days of institutional quarantine followed by 7 days of home quarantine.
Delhi BJP chief Adesh Gupta has requested the LG to make new quarantine centres as cases in the city are on the surge.
Discussed with LG to make new quarentine centres because there are several homes that are very small, oxygen cylinders need to be increased, call should be given asking voluntary health workers to join the COVID fight, said @adeshguptabjp after meeting @LtGovDelhi
@IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/gWxxgN8UTT
— Abhinav Rajput (@Abhinavrt) June 9, 2020
The Delhi High Court Tuesday asked the Delhi government to treat as representation a petition seeking direction to it for capping or fixing rates to be charged by private hospitals for treating COVID-19 patients and to prominently display availability of beds for them. The plea, filed by Vineet Kumar Wadhwa, through lawyer Praveen Chauhan, sought direction to the Delhi government to develop a mechanism whereby the hospitals here display availability of COVID 19 beds at a prominent place in the hospital and on their websites. A bench of Chief Justice D N Patel and Justice Prateek Jalan, conducting the hearing through video conferencing, also asked the Delhi government to treat as representation another petition by a two-year-old boy highlighting the considerable risk faced by him and many other minors due to the Delhi government’s decision to lift the restrictions imposed to contain the spread of COVID 19. The government will consider the representations and decide accordingly, the court said.
The Supreme Court Tuesday directed the Centre to send migrant labourers to their home states within 15 days. It also asked authorities to consider withdrawing all cases against migrant workers for alleged violation of lockdown norms under the Disaster Management Act. A bench of Justices Ashok Bhushan, Sanjay Kishan Kaul and M R Shah also directed state governments and Union Territories to formulate a scheme to provide employment to workers, asking that their skills be mapped.
The bench, which posted the matter for further hearing in July, said the schemes for welfare and employment of migrant workers should be publicised adequately. Further, it asked Centre to provide additional trains within 24 hours of states making the demand for sending the migrant workers back to their native places.
Amid the uptick in the number of cases in Delhi, Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia today said that officials from Centre say no community transmission of COVID-19 is seen in capital. His remarks came after a meeting with the Delhi Disaster Management Authority. The meeting of the DDMA was chaired by L-G Anil Baijal, who is the chairperson of the body. Besides Sisodia, Health Minister Satendra Jain, Chief Secretary Vijay Dev and other top officials of the administration attended the meeting. “We expect around 44,000 cases in Delhi by June 15, 1 lakh cases by June 30, 2.5 lakh cases by July 15, and 5.5 lakh cases by July 31,” Sisodia added. He also shared the govt’s bed requirement projections. He said by June 30, Delhi administration will have to arrange 15000 beds, 33000 by July 15 and 80000 by July 31.
Minutes earlier, Jain said that source is unknown in 50 per cent cases in the capital. Jain told reporters an official call on whether the city has entered the community transmission phase or not will have to be taken by the Union government, while indicating that the assessment of the local administration points towards the “third stage of spread”.
Delhi Lieutenant Governor Anil Baijal has also called for an “all-party meeting” to discuss the coronavirus situation in the capital and measures to contain the spread of the dreaded virus.  said on Monday that he would attend the meeting.
Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, who has been self-isolating after developing mild fever and sore throat, got himself tested for COVID-19 today. The chief minister has avoided meetings and visitors since Sunday afternoon, an AAP spokesperson said. The test report is expected later in the night or by Wednesday morning.
As many as 49 members of a team of National Disaster Response Force that had gone to West Bengal for rescue and relief operations during Cyclone Amphan has tested positive for COVID-19. The members were part of a 190 strong team that had gone to West Bengal last month from Odisha. This forms the largest chunk of positive cases in NDRF which has reported infections in single digits in Delhi. NDRF had until recently remained untouched by Covid even as infections in Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) had crossed 1500.
After observing that cases are “going up rapidly” and many officials in central ministries and departments have tested positive for Covid, the government has issued new guidelines for offices. These include not more than 20 officers will attend office per day; staggering timings will be implemented; face masks/shields will be worn indoors at all times; face-to-face meetings to be avoided; handwashing every half and hour etc.
Government of India issues fresh guidelines for officials and staffers of Central Government to prevent spread of #COVID19, after several officials in various Central Government Ministries/Departments have tested positive . pic.twitter.com/A3ZbF2unbB
— ANI (@ANI) June 9, 2020
	

A reputed sweetmeat chain of Kolkata has come out with a new item claiming that it contains various herbs and spices that will boost immunity to fight novel coronavirus. The ‘Immunity Sandesh’ has 15 herbs and spices such as haldi (turmeric), tulsi, saffron and cardamom, said Sudip Mallick, one of the owners of the shop. Instead of added sugar, the sandesh has Himalayan honey to raise the immunity bar of customers, he said.
 

