Cyclone Amphan Highlights: Centre announces Rs 1500 crore relief fund for West Bengal, Odisha
Cyclone Amphan Highlights: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday announced a relief package of Rs 500 crore for  cyclone-hit Odisha. The  announcement came soon after he undertook an aerial survey of the state to review the aftermath.
In a tweet, Modi congratulated the people and the government of Odisha for managing the crisis well. “Everyone is fighting COVID-19. In such a time, we had a super cyclone in some parts of India. This became very worrying. At the same time, due to the well established processes in Odisha, many lives were saved. I congratulate the people and Government of Odisha,” he said.
Earlier today, Modi announced an immediate relief of Rs 1,000 crore for West Bengal after he held an aerial survey and assessed the devastation caused by Cyclone Amphan which claimed 72 lives on Wednesday. Banerjee, however, insisted that the state had sufferred losses of over Rs 1 lakh crore for which it needed to be compensated.
At least 77 people were killed in the state, of which, 15 deaths were reported from Kolkata. The cyclone, which weakened into a depression on Friday, was further reduced to a well-marked low pressure area over North Bangladesh and the neighbouring area. “It is very likely to continue to move north-northeastwards and weaken further into a low pressure area during next 12 hours,” the Indian Meterological Department (IMD) had said . The cyclone hit Bengal and Odisha at a time when it is already struggling to fight the transmission of the novel coronavirus.

Indian film actor Shah Rukh Khan expressed his solidarity with the people of West Bengal and Odisha in the wake of Cyclone Amphan. Taking to Twitter, Khan said, "My prayers, thoughts & love to those affected by the devastation caused by cyclone Amphan in Bengal & Odisha. The news has left me feeling hollow. Each & everyone of them is my own. Like my family. We must stay strong through these testing times until we can smile together again."
My prayers, thoughts & love to those affected by the devastation caused by cyclone Amphan in Bengal & Odisha. The news has left me feeling hollow. Each & everyone of them is my own. Like my family. We must stay strong through these testing times until we can smile together again.
The European Union has announced an initial funding of 500,000 euro for cyclone Amphan-affected people in India. Cyclone Amphan has left 80 people dead and thousands homeless in West Bengal, battering several parts of the state. It also wreaked havoc in Odisha damaging power and telecom infrastructure in several coastal districts. 
"The EU will address immediate needs of people affected by the cyclone, as well as protect humanitarian aid and health workers from their exposure to the epidemic," EU Commissioner for Crisis Management Janez Lenarcic said in a statement. The EU is determined to start helping people in need with no further delay and provides an initial funding of 500,000 euro for India and 1,100,000 euro to support the immediate response in Bangladesh, the statement said.
"My thoughts are with the brave people who have been affected by tropical cyclone Amphan and especially those who have lost their loved ones. I am saddened to learn about fatalities in both India and Bangladesh, and the extent of destruction caused by strong winds, flooding and landslides, also damaging houses, infrastructure and livelihoods," Lenarcic said.
The turbulence caused by the cyclone has compounded the worries for the two states where the disease is spreading its tentacles fast, fuelled by the return home of lakhs of migrant workers.  
Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Friday said West Bengal has suffered losses of more than Rs 1 lakh crore due to super cyclonic storm 'Amphan', which has killed 80 people and left thousands homeless in the state.
"The prime minister has announced Rs 1,000 crore emergency fund... What's the package I don't know. I have told him that we will give him the details. It will take some time to assess the full overall situation but damage is of more than Rs 1 lakh crore," she said. Banerjee said she "reminded the prime minister about Rs 53,000 crore the central government owes to the state for various social security schemes." "If they (Centre) give some money to us, we can work," she said. The chief minister said she showed Modi some photographs capturing the havoc caused by 'Amphan' in Kolkata.

*Rs 1,000 crore relief package annouced*Ex-gratia of Rs 2 lakh to the families of each of those killedand Rs 50,000 for the injured.*Modi appreciated Banerjee's efforts in galvanising thestate administration to deal with the natural disaster
People in various parts of Kolkata staged protests on Friday demanding immediate resumption of power and water supply, two days after cyclone 'Amphan' ravaged West Bengal, snapping cables, uprooting trees and leaving behind a trail of destruction. Kolkata Mayor Firhad Hakim, on his part, gave assurances that normalcy would be restored in a week, as government officials were working round the clock to improve the situation. Attacking the TMC government, state BJP president Dilip Ghosh said the protests were a proof that the ruling dispensation has failed to live up to people's expectations.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who just conducted an aerial review of cyclone-hit Odisha, announced a refief package of Rs 500 crore for the state.  
Everyone is fighting COVID-19.In such a time, we had a super cyclone in some parts of India. This became very worrying. At the same time, due to the well established processes in Odisha, many lives were saved.I congratulate the people and Government of Odisha: PM @narendramodi
Bangladesh on Friday began assessing the damage caused by Cyclone Amphan that killed at least 22 people and left many displaced in the country's coastal areas.
*Twelve people died in Jashore, three in Pirojpur while Patuakhali registered two fatalities while Jhenaidah, Satkhira, Bhola, Chandpur and Barguna recorded one death each, the report said.
*The powerful cyclone has caused Taka 11 billion (USD 129 million) in damage to the housing, infrastructure, fisheries and livestock, water resources and agriculture in Bangladesh.
*At least 26 districts across the country have been affected by the cyclone.
*Around 1,100 kilometres of road in 26 districts, including Bagerhat, Khulna and Satkhira, have been damaged by the cyclone.
*The storm also harmed more than 200 bridges and culverts, 233 government infrastructures and sources of safe drinking water.
*Energy ministry officials said around 20 million electricity connections, out of total 36.4 million across the country, were severed as the cyclone hit.
Tibetan spiritual leader the Dalai Lama has written to Mamata Banerjee and Naveen Patnaik, chief ministers of West Bengal and Odisha respectively, expressing his sympathy for the loss of lives and property in the two states ravaged by cyclone Amphan. In his letters to the two chief ministers, the Buddhist leader said he is making a donation from the Dalai Lama Trust for the relief and rebuilding efforts "as a mark of solidarity with the people of West Bengal and Odisha." However, the amount of donation was not mentioned in the statement issued by his office on Thursday. "This morning His Holiness the Dalai Lama wrote to Mamata Banerjee and Naveen Patnaik, the Chief Ministers of West Bengal and Odisha respectively to express his sadness over the loss of life, the devastation of property, as well as the hardship caused to so many people due to Cyclone Amphan," said the statement on Thursday.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced an advance interim assistance of Rs 1,000 crore for cyclone-hit West Bengal on Monday. In a video message after reviewing the situation with Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar and Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee in Basirhat in North 24 Parganas district, Modi also announced an ex-gratia of Rs 2 lakh to the families of each of those killed during the devastation caused by cyclone Amphan, and Rs 50,000 for the injured.

Motorists make their way through damaged cables and a tree branch fallen in the middle of a road after Cyclone Amphan hit the region in Kolkata, India, Thursday, May 21, 2020. People forgot about social distancing and crammed themselves into government shelters, minutes before Cyclone Amphan crashed in West Bengal. The cyclone killed dozens of people and the coronavirus nine in this region, one of India‚Äôs poorer states. Even before the cyclone, its pandemic response was lagging; the state has one of the highest fatality rates from COVID-19 in India. With an economy crippled by India‚Äôs eight-week lockdown, and health care systems sapped by the virus, authorities must tackle both COVID-19 and the cyclone‚Äôs aftermath.(AP Photo) 

The Odisha government said on Friday that there has been no confirmation of any loss of human life in the state due to cyclone Amphan though it affected nearly 45 lakh people and damaged a large number of houses in the coastal districts. This is the first time that there has been no cyclone related death in the state, officials said. During its 21 years in the office, the Naveen Patnaik government has faced at least half-a-dozen cyclones -- Phailin (2013), Hudhud (2014), Titli (2018) Fani and Bulbul (2019) and now Amphan.  
A look back: 
*Patnaik assumed the office of the chief minister in 2000 in the backdrop of the super cyclone of 1999, in which at least 10,000 people were killed and the state was completely devastated.
*Immediately after assuming charge, Patnaik established the Odisha State Disaster Management Authority (OSDMA) and prepared a roadmap to tackle calamities such as cyclones and floods, said former chief secretary A P Padhi, who successfully dealt with cyclones Titli and Fani.*Despite the state government's zero casualty target, 44 people were killed in cyclone Phailin in 2013 and three fatalities were reported due to Hudhud in 2014.*Similarly, cyclone Titli that made landfall close to Gopalpur claimed 59 lives and 12 people are still missing, official sources said.*In 2019, extremely severe cyclone Fani made landfall in Puri and claimed at least 64 lives, and in the subsequent Bulbul that passed touching the Odisha coast in October, two people were killed.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday began second leg of his visit as he reached Odisha. Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik received him. The Prime Minister plans to take an aerial survey of affected areas in state.  Earlier today, he visited West Bengal. 

#CycloneAmphan Updates 22/5/20-𝐃𝐀𝐘2-#PostAmphanRestoration@NDRFHQ @ Restoration Work across Kolkata city area, West Bengal #NDRF4U#Committed2Serve @NDRFHQ @ndmaindia @PMOIndia @HMOIndia @PIBHomeAffairs @BhallaAjay26 @DDNewslive @ANI @airnewsalerts @PTI_News pic.twitter.com/a3MRyJdglx
During her meeting with the Prime Minister today, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee said West Bengal has suffered losses to the tune of Rs 1 lakh crore due to cyclone Amphan. After conducting an aerial survey of some of the affected areas and attending a review meeting along with Modi in Basirhat, she said that there is a need to work together at this hour of crisis. Banerjee said she has briefed the Prime Minister in detail about the post-cyclone situation in the state.
Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal today expressed solidarity with cyclone-hit West Bengal and Odisha, and offered help to the chief ministers of the two states. In a tweet, Kejriwal said, "Dear @MamataOfficial didi, on behalf of the people of Delhi, I extend our full support and solidarity with you and the people of West Bengal in the wake of the destruction caused by Cyclone Amphan. Kindly let us know if we could help in any manner in this hour of crisis". In another tweet, Kejriwal also expressed solidarity with Odisha and offered help to the state chief minister Naveen Patnaik.
Dear @MamataOfficial didi, on behalf of the people of Delhi, I extend our full support and solidarity with you and the people of West Bengal in the wake of the destruction caused by #CycloneAmphan. Kindly let us know if we could help in any manner in this hour of crisis.



Dear @Naveen_Odisha ji, on behalf of the people of Delhi, I extend our full solidarity and support with you and the people of Odisha in the wake of the destruction caused by #CycloneAmphan. Kindly let us know if we could help in any manner in this hour of crisis.



"This is more than a national disaster. I have not seen such devastation in my life. Sixty per cent of people have been affected in West Bengal. More than six crore have been directly affected," Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee told reporters at the Kolkata airport today. "It will take some time to restore normalcy... It's a catastrophe... severe disaster. Our officials and ministers are all working. Police are also working tirelessly. We are fighting three challenges -- there is lockdown, then there is Covid-19, and now this disaster. The villages have been entirely devastated," she noted.
Bangladesh Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina today held a telephonic conversation with West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee and discussed the damages caused by Amphan. At least 12 people have been killed and nearly 2.2 lakh houses were damaged in Bangladesh due to the cyclone.
Just In: Bangladesh Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina called up West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee today. She asked her about the damages caused by #AmphanAt least 12 people have been killed & nearly 2.2 lakh houses were damaged in Bangladesh due to the cyclone.@IndianExpress



#CycloneAmphan Updates 22/5/20-𝐃𝐀𝐘2-#PostAmphanRestoration@NDRFHQ @ Restoration Work at Kolkata, West Bengal#NDRF4U#Committed2Serve @NDRFHQ @ndmaindia @PMOIndia @HMOIndia @PIBHomeAffairs @BhallaAjay26 @DDNewslive @ANI @airnewsalerts @PTI_News pic.twitter.com/iotvRE9YdE
"We are battling a pandemic on one hand and there is a cyclone situation in some parts. Dealing with the pandemic requires social distancing whereas battling the cyclone requires people to move to safer areas," Modi said. He added: All aspects relating to rehabilitation, reconstruction will be addressed. We all want West Bengal to move ahead. Centre will always stand with West Bengal in these testing times. Despite these contradictions, West Bengal is fighting well. We are all with West Bengal in these adverse times." 
 Cyclone Amphan made landfall in coastal areas of West Bengal at around 2.30 pm on Wednesday. (Express photo)
Cyclone Amphan made landfall in coastal areas of West Bengal at around 2.30 pm on Wednesday, killing at least 10 people, and leaving a trail of destruction behind. The cyclone hit the state at a time when it is already struggling to fight the transmission of the novel coronavirus.
According to the IMD, the extremely severe cyclonic storm Amphan crossed West Bengal-Bangladesh coast between Digha (West Bengal) and Hatiya Islands (Bangladesh) across Sunderbans (West Bengal) near latitude 21.65N & longitude 88.3E between 3.30 pm and 5.30 pm with wind speed of 155-165 kmph gusting to 185 kmph.
