Mutual logistics support pact on table for Modi-Morrison virtual summit
Ahead of the virtual summit between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Australian PM Scott Morrison on June 4, Australian High Commissioner Barry O’Farrell said on Monday that the mutual logistics support agreement is on the table.
The agreement will allow the two sides to use each other’s military bases for logistical support.
This will be one of the key items on the agenda during the summit, and the two sides have been negotiating the pact for some time now.
The Australian envoy also advocated reforms in global institutions and representation of India and Australia in multilateral groupings, a day after US President Donald Trump called for expansion of G-7 and including India and Australia in the grouping.
With the ongoing tension between India and China on the border, he also said it was for the two countries to resolve the row bilaterally and there was no role for any other country. “The issue is for China and India to resolve bilaterally. It is not an issue for Australia or any other country,” he said.
The Australian envoy said his government is concerned about the growing Chinese assertiveness in South China Sea as well as China’s plan to enforce a security law in Hong Kong notwithstanding widespread protests by its citizens.
“In the virtual summit between the two leaders, you will see the Australia-India relationship reaching a historic high, matched by an ambitious agenda by both countries on what we can achieve in the future,” he told a group of journalists at an online briefing.
O’Farrell said the focus of the talks will be to boost cooperation in areas like public health, education, science and technology cooperation, cybersecurity and critical technology and defence.
He said further enhancing bilateral maritime security as well as expanding cooperation in the Indo-Pacific region would be other key issues for talks.
On declining economic growth rate in India in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic, O’Farrell said he was optimistic about the Indian and Australian economies. “We have some of the wealthiest funds in the world and India is looking for foreign direct investment. There is a synergy between us,” he said.
The two countries, he said, have also supported the WHO reforms and had asked for an independent probe into WHO’s response to the pandemic.
Morrison was scheduled to come to India for a bilateral visit in January, but the visit was cancelled due to the bushfires. This is the first bilateral summit being held virtually.

