Coronavirus India June 7 Highlights: Govt says ‘fine tuning’ strategy based on emerging knowledge, experience
On a day the number of confirmed cases in India crossed 2.5 lakh, the health ministry said the government is “fine-tuning” its strategy based on emerging knowledge and on-ground experience. It also defended the timing of imposition of the nationwide lockdown aiming to contain the spread of virus and termed “baseless” certain media reports expressing concerns that it did not take suggestions from technical experts while chalking out its COVID-19 strategy.

The Union Culture Ministry Sunday approved opening of 820  monuments under Archeological Survey of India which have places of worship from Monday, Minister Prahlad Patel said. Among over 3,000 ASI-maintained monuments, only those where religious events take place, such as Nila Mosque at Hauz Khas enclave, the Qutub archaeological area and Lal Gumbad in Delhi, will be opened. All these were shut from March 17 in view of the coronavirus crisis.
The global death toll exceeded 4 lakh-mark on Sunday with 400,013 fatalities as recorded by Johns Hopkins University. Over 6.9 million people have been infected so far, of whom 30 lakh have recovered. With over 2.54 lakh cases, India has beaten Spain to be the fifth nation worst hit by the COVID-19 pandemic. according to latest figures by Johns Hopkins. Now, only the US, Brazil, Russia, and the UK have more cases than India. The death toll in India stands at 6929. There are 1.2 lakh active cases, while 1.19 lakh have recovered.

Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar on Sunday expressed concern about the surge in coronavirus disease (Covid-19) cases and deaths in the state in the last few days, and called on the government to take “tough measures”.
Dhankhar said the alarming rise in positive cases since the start of the first phase of easing lockdown restrictions was a warning sign for the Mamata Banerjee government. Read more here
West Bengal recorded its fastest increase in 1,000 Covid-19 cases on Sunday, reaching the 8,000-mark in a span of two days, even as 13 more people died of the disease.
The state health department reported the highest single-day surge in cases for the third straight day, with 449 people testing positive for the infection. On Saturday, 435 cases had been detected, and 427 people had tested positive the day before. The case count on Sunday stood at 8,187. Read more here
Forty police officers including the Barnala SSP were quarantined after a drug smuggler arrested last week tested positive for the novel coronavirus.
Three police officers and a 51-year-old man who owns a medical store in Malerkotla, who came in contact with the accused, have also tested positive so far. The drug smuggler’s wife (28) and 70-year-old mother too tested positive Sunday evening. Read more here
Three Mohali residents, including a photographer who runs a studio in Dhakoli, tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday, taking the district tally up to 131.
The district now has 20 active cases.
The other two persons who tested positive are a woman and her son, who are family members of another patient from Rishi Apartment in Sector 70. Read more here
After consistently sliding for over a month, the death rate in Maharashtra has once again started to rise. On Sunday, the mortality rate was recorded at 3.58 per cent, up from the 3.25 per cent recorded on May 25. In Mumbai, the mortality rate stood at 3.55 per cent on the day.
The state Sunday recorded 3,007 new Covid-19 cases, 1,218 of them in Mumbai alone, taking the total virus count in Maharashtra to 85,975. A total of 39,314 people have recovered, so far. Read more here
Principal Director General of Press Information Bureau K S Dhatwalia has tested positive for COVID-19 and admitted to AIIMS, sources said on Sunday. He was admitted to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) trauma centre at 7 pm, they said. AIIMS trauma centre is a dedicated COVID-19 hospital. There was no official word on his health condition.
The National Media Centre, where his office is located, has been closed and will remain shut on Monday as the entire building will be sanitised, official sources said. The NMC is likely to remain closed on Tuesday as well and a massive contact tracing exercise is being carried out in accordance with the standard protocol, they said. All activities of the Press Information Bureau (PIB), including holding of press conferences, will take place in the Shastri Bhawan till the NMC is completely sanitised and reopened, the sources said. Dhatwalia had on Wednesday shared the stage with Union Ministers Narendra Singh Tomar and Prakash Javadekar when they had briefed the media on the decisions taken by the Cabinet. PTI 
A day after the state government announced the Standard Operating Protocols (SOPs) ahead of the reopening of places of worship from June 8, the Vadodara city police issued a notification on Sunday imposing Section 144 of Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC) until June 30, while releasing a list of SOPs that all places of worship must follow. Meanwhile, the Roman Catholic Church of Gujarat has decided to maintain 'status quo' of the existing lockdown in view of the pandemic.
In Saturday's meeting held by Chief Minister Vijay Rupani and state home minister Pradeepsinh Jadeja with various religious heads, representatives of the Catholic church had asked the government to consider their request to administer the 'holy communion' to the faithful as it is an intrinsic part of the service and "cannot be considered as prasad" which is prohibited in the SOPs.
On Sunday, the Catholic diocese issued a video message through its spokesperson informing the believers that the church has decided to maintain a 'status quo' with the ongoing lockdown after examining the protocols laid down by the government.
On Saturday, the Muslim clerics had also asked Rupani to excuse the mosques from the mandatory installation of sanitizer dispensers since it is alcohol-based and 'prohibited in Islam'.
The Commissioner of Police on Sunday confirmed that the order allows all places of worship to carry on with their regular prayer services so long as the mandatory social distancing and precautions mentioned in the SOPs -- originally issued by the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare -- are followed.
The notification of the Vadodara police, signed by Commissioner of Police Anupam Singh Gahlaut, states, "All places of religious worship will have to follow the SOPs to precision, which has been enlisted by the health and family welfare department as well as the state government."
The panel of eminent doctors constituted by the Gujarat government, to control the spread of Covid-19 as well as to implement and supervise related provisions in the state, fails to provide a definite answer for the state’s high mortality rate. Read mroe here
A 60-year-old woman who had tested positive for the novel coronavirus in Ludhiana died Sunday, taking the state death toll to 51. A government functionary said she also suffered from a renal disease.
Meanwhile, a day after Punjab reported 54 new Covid cases, the spike being witnessed in about a fortnight reached another high with 93 new cases on Sunday, taking the state tally since the outbreak to 2,608.
Among the cases reported on Sunday, 42 were contacts of Covid patients, 14, including two from abroad, had travel history outside the state. The source of infection was not immediately known for 33 patients. Among the new cases are four pregnant women from Ludhiana and a policeman from Barnala. Read more
Tripura's COVID-19 cases crossed 800 on Sunday as 53 patients were found afflicted by the virus afresh. Among all corona patients, 192 have 'recovered' so far and were discharged from hospital. However, 607 active cases are still under treatment.
Chief Minister Biplab Kumar Deb tweeted about these cases and wrote, "53 people (Sepahijala Dist: 49 & Gomati Dist: 4) found COVID-19 #POSITIVE in Tripura out of 1153 samples tested. All of them have returned from Chennai by train. Confirmed case: 803 Active case: 607 Discharge: 192 Migrated: 3 Unnatural Death: 1 #TripuraCOVID19Count". According to latest reports, 12,139 persons are placed under surveillance for coronavirus including 751 admitted in different quarantine centers and 11388 persons under home quarantine. Tripura has tested 35,263 persons for COVID-19 at a rate the state government claims to be highest in NE India.
5️⃣3️⃣ people (Sepahijala Dist: 49 & Gomati Dist: 4) found COVID-19 #POSITIVE in Tripura out of 1153 samples tested. All of them have returned from Chennai by train.↗️Confirmed case: 803↗️Active case: 607↗️Discharge: 192↗️Migrated: 3↗️Unnatural Death: 1#TripuraCOVID19Count
Jammu and Kashmir on Sunday reported the highest ever spike in COVID-19 with 620 Corona positive cases during the past 24 hours. These included 583 from Kashmir and 37 in Jammu division. With this, the number of active positive cases across the Union Territory has risen to 2,830 including 2,146 in Kashmir and 684 in Jammu division. There have been 41 COVID-19 related deaths also including 5 in Jammu and 36 in Kashmir.
According to the daily health bulletin issued by UT government, a total of 2,11,513 people have been enlisted for observation and 41,848 people kept under home quarantine. A total of 2,830 people have been kept under hospital isolation and 52 under hospital quarantine. - Arun Sharma reports from Jammu
Asserting that coronavirus is a "new agent" about which not everything is known, the government on Sunday defended the timing of imposition of the lockdown and rejected as "baseless" media reports expressing concerns that it did not take inputs from technical experts while drawing up its COVID-19 strategy.
The government also said it is "fine-tuning" its strategy based on emerging knowledge and experience on the ground. In a statement, the Health Ministry said a section of the media is reporting on the decisions regarding India's approach to the pandemic and asserted that the decision on the lockdown was taken in the background of rapid escalation of COVID-19 cases. (PTI)
Meanwhile, Maharashtra Home Minister Anil Deshmukh denied Shiv Sena having any such opinion of Sood and said the party will appreciate whoever takes good initiatives. Talking to news agency ANI, "Actor Sonu Sood has done good work by sending a lot of migrant workers to their homes. I did not hear what Sanjay Raut sahab said. We will appreciate whoever takes such good initiatives, be it Sonu Sood or anyone else."
Actor Sonu Sood has done good work by sending a lot of migrant workers to their homes. I did not hear what Sanjay Raut sahab said. We will appreciate whoever takes such good initiatives, be it Sonu Sood or anyone else: Maharashtra Home Minister Anil Deshmukh pic.twitter.com/VVuEhG3LDt
Shiv Sena leader Sanjay Raut Sunday wondered whether the BJP was behind Bollywood actor Sonu Sood’s recent efforts to help stranded migrant workers, in a bid to show the Uddhav Thackeray government in a poor light.
In his weekly column ‘Rokhthok’ in the party’s mouthpiece ‘Saamana’, Raut raised questions on the sudden rise of “Mahatma” Sood and referred to a sting operation ahead of the 2019 General Elections, which showed Sood accepting an offer to promote the BJP-led government on various social media platforms. Sena’s attack came in the backdrop of Sood arranging buses and chartered flights for migrant workers stuck in Mumbai. Read full story here

A 37-year-old Central Reserve Police Force jawan suffering from cancer has succumbed to COVID-19, taking the total number of deaths due to the disease in the country's largest paramilitary force to three, officials said on Sunday. They said the jawan, a constable of the 141st battalion, died at a hospital here on Friday. (PTI)
Rajasthan Health Minister Raghu Sharma on Sunday said out of 10,385 COVID-19 patients in the state, 7,606 have been cured, registering a 73.24 percent recovery rate. Sharma said if the number of infected patients is increasing in the state, the cases of recovery are also increasing in the same proportion. So far, about 5 lakh people have been tested for virus infection and more than 1.25 lakh tests have been done at the state's largest Sawai Man Singh Hospital here alone. The health minister said the number of corona patients in the state is doubling in 21 days, while their death rate is 2.25 per cent. (PTI)
Two more deaths reported in Bengaluru
#COVID19: #Karnataka reports two more deaths in #Bengaluru — of a 61-year-old female (P-2519) and a 57-year-old male (P-4315). Death toll due to #coronavirus in the state is now 61. Fatality rate: 1.12 @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/ZI7SwBYSE5
The Rajasthan Police is conducting an inquiry after receiving a complaint that the staff of a private hospital in Churu district allegedly discussed not attending to Muslim patients. Screenshots of a purported WhatsApp chat between the staff of the hospital have gone viral on social media.
On Saturday, Dr Sunil Choudhary, who runs the Srichand Baradiya Rog Nidan Kendra in Sardarshahar and whose staff purportedly wrote the messages, apologised through a Facebook post, saying the hospital staff didn’t have any intention to hurt any religious groups. Deep Mukherjee's report from Jaipur

deleting_message
Karnataka reported 239 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday. With this, the total number of positive persons in the state has gone up to 5,452 It includes 61 deaths and 2,132 discharges.
Karnataka reported 239 new #COVID19 cases on Sunday. With this, the total number of positive persons in the state has gone up to 5,452 It includes 61 deaths and 2,132 discharges. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/qtNTpczVm0
 Shops open as part of phase one of unlock
A 37-year-old Central Reserve Police Force personnel suffering from cancer has succumbed to COVID-19, officials told PTI on Sunday. This is the third death due to COVID-19 in CRPF, and 11th among the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs), or the paramilitary forces. They said the constable of the 141st battalion, died ina hospital here on Friday.
Amid a surge in the number of cases, Delhi Chief Minister Kejriwal today announced that the government and a few private hospitals in the city will only treat patients from the national capital. Central hospitals will remain open for patients from across the country. The Delhi border, which was sealed last week, will also be opened for inter-state movement from Monday, he said. Religious places, malls, and restaurants will resume activity from Monday as per the Centre’s guidelines. Hotels and banquet halls will, however, remain shut.
Mumbai, the city that accounts for 20 per cent of all novel Coronavirus infections in India, has come under scrutiny for its stagnating testing numbers. The city has been testing around 4,000 samples every day and this number has not increased for over a month now.
This, despite the fact that it has the capacity to carry out about 10,000 tests per day, and the number of positive cases that it discovers each day has been on a steady rise.
The debate on testing has been going on since the outbreak started in India in the beginning of March. The conventional wisdom is that the more tests are carried out, the more are the chances of finding positive patients. Read here
That is because a majority of the infected people, more than 80 per cent, are expected to be asymptomatic, meaning they do not show any signs of the COVID-19 disease they are carrying. But they are capable of transmitting the virus to others.
Only if they are tested, can they be identified and isolated. That is why health experts have been stressing on the need to ramp up testing infrastructure, and test more and more people, even asymptomatic ones.
The testing numbers have steadily improved in the last two months. India is now testing more than one lakh samples every day. Almost every state, including Maharashtra, has significantly increased its testing numbers during this time. Mumbai, however, has bucked this trend in the last one month at least.
 Workers line up for medical workers to take swabs for the coronavirus test at a large factory in Wuhan in central China's Hubei province (Chinatopix Via AP)
Meanwhile, Beijing on Friday decided to lower its Covid-19 emergency response, marking the return of normalcy in China’s capital following the coronavirus outbreak, while the central city of Wuhan, the origin point of the pandemic, cleared all its confirmed cases.
Wuhan recorded zero cases of the virus following testing of 10 million people.
Beijing city will lower its emergency response to the novel coronavirus epidemic from the second level to the third level starting Saturday, a local official announced on Friday.
