Coronavirus July 10 Updates: Triple lockdown in Thiruvananthapuram extended by another week
Kerala’s COVID-19 tally is inching towards the 7,000 mark, with 416 people testing positive on Friday in the highest single-day spike of the infection so far, as Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan warned that the situation was “becoming alarming”.
Vijayan also announced that the triple lockdown imposed in Thiruvananthapuram corporation limits will be extended by another week.
The Covid-19 tally in India on Friday inched closer towards the eight lakh mark after 26,507 fresh cases were reported within a span of 24 hours, taking the total to 7,93,802. The number of fatalities stood at 21,604, according to data released by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
Globally, over 12.2 million people have been infected with the novel coronavirus. The United States continued to be the worst affected followed by Brazil, India, Russia and Peru.

With 141 new COVID-19 cases detected in Tripura on Friday, the state's total corona tally rose to 1931. However, out of these cases, 1372 have recovered and were discharged from hospitals. 559 active patients are being treated in the state now.
Maharashtra reported record single-day spike of 7,862 new cases on Friday, pushing the state's tally of Covid positive patients to 2,38,461, the health department said. With 226 more patients succumbing to the disease, the death count in the state reached 9,893, it said. As many as 5,366 patients recovered and were discharged from the hospitals on Friday, which pushed the number of recovered patients in the state to 1,32,625, it said, adding that 12,53,978 people have been tested so far. There are 95,943 active cases in the state at present.
India's COVID-19 vaccine candidates will go through a rigorous evaluation process that will not be compromised, the government's Principal Scientific Advisor K VijayRaghavan said on Friday, indicating that the ICMR-Bharat Biotech vaccine is unlikely to be out by August 15, news agency PTI reported.
Phase 1 of the human trial of any vaccine usually takes 28 days and that is followed by two other phases, VijayRaghavan said while addressing a webinar at the Vivekananda International Foundation. (PTI)
A 56-year-old executive engineer fell down from the tenth floor of the Stem Cell Hospital at New Civil Hospital (NCH) in Surat, where work to convert the facility into a dedicated Covid hospital is in progress. It has not been established whether the engineer committed suicide or accidentally fell down, police said.
Jashwant Shihora (56), a resident of Parle Point area in Surat, who worked as an executive engineer at the electrical department of Project Implementation Unit, reached the Stem Cell Hospital at NCH on Friday morning, to conduct a routine check.
According to police sources, Jashwant had gone to the tenth floor alone and fell down under mysterious circumstances. The other labourers immediately gathered at the spot even as Jashwant’s head was profusely bleeding. He was immediately taken to the NCH trauma centre where doctors declared him dead on arrival.
Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan on Friday said that the triple lockdown imposed in Thiruvananthapuram corporation limits will be extended by another week. The state government had on Sunday decided to enforce the lockdown in the capital city following a spike in coronavirus cases.
Kerala's COVID-19 tally is inching towards the 7,000 mark, with 416 people testing positive on Friday in the highest single-day spike of the infection so far, as Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan warned that the situation was "becoming alarming". The day also saw the highest number of cases through contact with infected people– 204.
Of the infected, 123 people had come from abroad and 51 from other states, Vijayan told reporters in Thiruvananthapuram after the daily COVID-19 evaluation meeting, PTI reported.
Uttar Pradesh, which had been praised by Prime Minister Narendra Modi for successfully controlling the spread of the novel coronavirus despite its large size and population of 24 crore, unexpectedly announced fresh restrictions, which will be in place for 55 hours beginning 10 pm on Friday (July 10).
The government’s order announcing the curbs said the decision had been taken after a review of the present situation of Covid-19 and other communicable diseases.
So what is this “present situation” in Uttar Pradesh? What are the pandemic numbers in the state currently, and what is the government aiming to achieve by imposing the fresh restrictions? Read our explainer to know more.

A medical team that went to the coastal village of Poonthura off Thiruvananthapuram for Covid-19 swab collection Friday were surrounded by angry locals who threatened them with expletives and even coughed at them. Poonthura and its adjoining areas have been described by government officials as exhibiting a ‘super spread’ of the coronavirus infections with over 200 persons testing positive in the last week alone.
On Friday morning, dozens of men and women came onto the streets in the village agitating against the tight lockdown restrictions and claiming that the health department’s data on infections among them was hyped. They protested without masks and by abandoning social distancing regulations. Click here to read our full report.
Referring to several recent studies, the WHO has said that some outbreaks that have occurred in crowded indoor spaces suggest “the possibility of aerosol transmission”, although “combined with droplet transmission”. Such situations have arisen “during choir practice, in restaurants or in fitness classes”.
According to the WHO, “in these events, short-range aerosol transmission, particularly in specific indoor locations, such as crowded and inadequately ventilated spaces over a prolonged period of time with infected persons cannot be ruled out”.
There is, however, a caveat — the WHO does not think that even in these situations, the virus was transmitted exclusively by the aerial route.
The WHO brief still says that “the detailed investigations of these clusters suggest that droplet and fomite transmission could also explain human-to-human transmission within these clusters”. Click here to read our explainer.

In a bid to curb the spread of Covid-19, a 10-day lockdown will be imposed in Pune, neighbouring Pimpri-Chinchwad and a few other parts of the district starting July 13, news agency PTI reported on Friday.The lockdown will come into force from midnight of July 13 and end on July 23."A lockdown will be imposed in Pune, Pimpri Chinchwad and some other areas of the district considering the rise in COVID-19 cases," divisional commissioner (Pune division) Deepak Mhaisekar was quoted as saying by the news agency.
Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has asked officials to carry out rapid antigen tests in every household during the three-day special cleanliness campaign initiated from Friday.
"A special cleanliness campaign has been initiated from July 10-13 to create awareness about COVID-19, vector-borne diseases and other ailments. Under the campaign, door-to-door surveillance should be done and rapid antigen tests should be conducted in every household," a statement quoting the chief minister said.
He also said that the number of lab technicians should be increased and 15,000 rapid antigen tests should be conducted per day, news agency PTI reported. 
Several areas of West Bengal wore a deserted look Friday as most people preferred to stay indoors on the second day of the seven-day lockdown clamped on the state's containment zones. The containment zones, spread across 20 of the state's 23 districts, went into total lockdown from 5 pm on Thursday. 
On Friday, 53-year-old Hareswar Nath of the 16th (IR)BN of the Assam Police succumbed to the novel coronavirus. Nath had tested positive for COVID-19 on July 7. “With a heavy heart, we are saddened to inform that Hav. Hareswar Nath, 16 IRBn, who tested positive for #CoronaVirus on July 7, 2020 passed away today. Our deepest condolences are with the bereaved family and colleagues” tweeted Assam Police. 
Earlier in the day, health minister Himanta Biswa Sarma had said that Nath was “non-symptomatic patient with no comorbidities.” “His oxygen levels plummeted to 90 within hours and he collapsed. My deepest condolences to his family. RIP” wrote Sarma on Twitter. 
This is Assam’s fifth reported death on Friday. In the morning, four patients, aged 42, 68, 72 and 70, admitted to the ICU at Gauhati Medical College and Hospital, succumbed to the infection. So far, Assam has reported 32 deaths. The number of active cases stand at 5,432.
With a heavy heart, we are saddened to inform that Hav. Hareswar Nath, 16 IRBn, who tested positive for #CoronaVirus on July 7, 2020 passed away today. Our deepest condolences are with the bereaved family and colleagues.
A few days into the second phase of the nationwide ‘unlock’, Goa’s otherwise bustling Vasco railway station is quieter than it has been in months. Ironically, it was in the midst of the lockdown — when passenger trains were suspended, borders were sealed, and shops selling ‘non-essentials’ had downed their shutters — that the South Goa station was buzzing with activity.
During the lockdown, hundreds of migrant workers and their families would line up outside the station three times a day for nearly two months to partake in simple wholesome meals laid out by a group of Railway Protection Force (RPF) constables and a few station employees. Click here to read the story.
Starting 10 pm Friday, a 55-hour lockdown will come into force across Uttar Pradesh. Only emergency and essential services will remain available during this period.
The lockdown order, issued by State Chief Secretary R K Tiwari to the district and police administration on Friday, said the restrictions are being imposed to control the spread of “Covid-19 and communicable diseases like malaria, encephalitis, dengue and kala-azar”.
Here is a look at what will open and what will remain closed:
*All offices, markets, rural haats, mandis and commercial establishments will remain closed. However, doorstep delivery will be allowed.
*Only movement of those associated with essential services will be permitted, but they must show their identity cards which will be considered as their “duty pass”.
*There will be no restrictions on flights or trains. The Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation will be allowed to operate buses for train passengers; all other bus services will be stopped.
*While industrial units in rural areas will remain operational, those in urban areas will be closed – except those that are categorised as “continuous units”.
*The national and state highways will remain open, and petrol pumps and dhabas along these highways will be allowed to operate.
*The construction of major infrastructure projects like expressways, bridges and roads as well as big private construction projects will not be affected.
*The health department will send teams to conduct house-to-house surveys during this period.
The World Health Organisation (WHO) has admitted the possibility of airborne transmission of SARS-COV-2 during certain medical procedures and in crowded indoor settings with poor ventilation through aerosols — smaller airborne particles that linger in the air for longer periods of time.
“Airborne transmission of the virus can occur in health care settings where specific medical procedures, called aerosol-generating procedures, generate very small droplets called aerosols. Some outbreak reports related to indoor crowded spaces have suggested the possibility of aerosol transmission, combined with droplet transmission, for example, during choir practice, in restaurants or in fitness classes,” the WHO said about the spread of the novel coronavirus Thursday. More details here.
Twenty-six more personnel of the BSF have tested positive for COVID-19 in Meghalaya, taking the number of infections in the border-guarding force in the state to 91, Chief Minister Conrad K Sangma said on Friday.
They are all posted at the Border Security Force (BSF) frontier headquarters in Umpling, which has been declared a containment zone, news agency PTI reported.

Pune district in Maharashtra reported its highest single-day spike of 1,803 new Covid-19 cases, which pushed its overall count to 34,399, a health official said on Friday. This single-day rise was reported on Thursday, he said. The death toll in the district reached 978 with 34 more people succumbing to the infection on Thursday, the official said. "Of the 1,803 cases, as many as 1,032 were reported from the areas located in the Pune Municipal Corporation limits, where the number of patients has reached 24,977," he said.
The Maharashtra government today informed the Bombay High Court that the prohibitory order against spreading of incorrect or false information on social media amid the Covid-19 pandemic has ended and no extension has been given to it. Advocate General Ashutosh Kumbhakoni told a division bench of Justices A A Sayed and M S Karnik that the order dated May 23 passed by the deputy commissioner of police (Operations) under section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC) had been in effect only till June 8. "The same has not been extended after June 8 and presently there is no prohibitory order in place," Kumbhakoni said.
Karnataka Chief Minister B S Yediyurappa has decided to go in home isolation after some of his staff members tested positive for coronavirus. "Will coordinate work via video conference from home for the next few days. I'm healthy, no need to worry," he tweeted.
??? ????? ??????????? ??? ?????????? ?????? ???????? ??????? ????, ???????? ??? ????? ??? ????????? ??????? ????????????????. ?????? ??????????? ???? ????? ????, ??????????? ???????????. ???? ???? ???? ?????????? ????????????????. 1/2



 
 A doctor gives physical therapy to a COVID- 19 positive patient at an isolation center in Mumbai (AP Photo/Rajanish Kakade)
India Coronavirus numbers explained: Positivity rate on the rise, shows prevalence of disease
Positivity rate is a good indicator to assess the prevalence of the disease in the community. The rise in positivity rate means that the growth in the number of confirmed cases is outpacing the growth in the tests being conducted. And this is happening mainly because the criteria for testing is still restrictive in most states.
As scientists have been pointing out, the more the number of tests that are carried out, greater would be the chances of finding infected cases. However, people are not being randomly tested. Because of limited testing capacities, states are being selective in testing people.
For example, many states are testing only people who are showing signs of symptoms, or those who are higher risk of attaining the disease, like the primary or secondary contacts of an already infected person. Now, there is a much greater likelihood of these people testing positive, compared to other people. So if the total number of tests are rising, but still only symptomatic cases, or those at high risk, are being tested, the positivity rate would progressively rise.
Harvard, MIT sue US govt depts over new immigration rule for foreign students
A day after the US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) announced international students could not be in the country for an online-only course load, MIT and Harvard filed a suit against ICE and the Department of Homeland Security, in the US District Court in Boston, Massachusetts.
