PM Modi at ICC: Have to manufacture products India is forced to import
Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday said the Covid-19 crisis presents the country with a unique opportunity to become self reliant. Addressing the Indian Chamber of Commerce’s 95th annual plenary session, PM Modi said steps have to be taken to ensure products that India is forced to import should be manufactured locally.
“India’s goal of self-reliance has been paramount in the policy and practice of the country. The COVID-19 crisis gave us lessons on how to speed up efforts in that direction,” he said.
The Prime Minister also said that people-centric, people-driven and planet-friendly development has become part of the BJP-led Central government’s governance.
“India is fighting multiple challenges along with COVID-19, including floods, locust attack, earthquakes…We have to turn crisis into an opportunity for creating Atmanirbhar Bharat and take steps to ensure that products which we import from elsewhere are manufactured in India,” PM Modi added,
He stressed that the manufacturing sector in West Bengal needs to be revived. This is the time for bold investments, not conservative decisions, he added. The prime minister’s message was in line with his Aatma Nirbhar Bharat mission for a self-reliant India.
In his recent address to members of the business community earlier this week, the Prime Minister had said the government’s highest priority is to strengthen the economy against the impact of coronavirus and get the country back on the growth track.
Calling industry to rise to the occasion, Modi had said there is a need to build robust local supply chains and focus on Make In India.
Addressing the CII Annual Session 2020 through a video link, the Prime Minster had pointed out that the ramping up of manufacturing of personal protective equipment (PPE) over the last three months was a positive step. Efforts are being made to reduce import dependence in sectors such as mobile and defence manufacturing, he had said.
There’s a need for “intent, inclusion, investment, infrastructure, and innovation” to get back on the path of growth, he had said. Terming CII as ‘Champions of Indigenous Inspirations’, Modi had said domestic industries have to facilitate recovery and assist in the next level of growth.
