Coronavirus April 24 Highlights: 1,752 new cases recorded in 24 hours — highest single-day rise
With 1,752 new positive Covid-19 cases in the last 24 hours, India recorded its highest single-day spike in cases on Friday, taking the country’s tally to 23,452. While the death toll stood at 723, as many as 4,813 persons have been cured and discharged so far. Earlier today, in a press briefing, the Health Ministry said that no new cases were reported in 15 districts in the last 28 days.
The govt, meanwhile, said the lockdown announced by PM Narendra Modi was a timely step, without which there would have been an estimated one lakh COVID-19 cases in India by now. Officials said the virus outbreak is under control in the country and credited a robust surveillance network along with implementation of the lockdown and other containment measures for it.
More than 2.7 million people have been reported to be infected by the virus globally and 192,125 have died, according to John Hopkins tally. The US leads the chart with 869,000 cases and 50,031 deaths. The next worst-affected countries are Italy on 25,549 deaths, Spain on 22,524 and France on 21,889.
Follow Indian Express COVID-19 tracker for latest updates

A BJP MLA in Nagpur on Friday protested in front of the district headquarters demanding that a quarantine facility for suspected coronavirus cases be shifted as it is in a densely populated area where people are already "frightened" because of the outbreak.
Hingna MLA Sameer Meghe said the quarantine facility set up in Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar Government Boys' Hostel in Wanadongri should be closed and relocated. "Wanadongri area is spread over 1,208 hectares and is home to labourers and small traders. People here are already frightened because of the coronavirus outbreak. The quarantine facility in the hostel should be relocated immediately," Meghe said
In a modification to its April 15 order, the Ministry of Home Affairs Friday allowed registered shops, including those in residential complexes and market complexes, except shops in multi-brand and single brand malls, to open with 50% strength of workers wearing masks.

A tigress has died in Delhi Zoo due to “kidney failure” and authorities have sent her samples for coronavirus testing.
The 14-year-old big cat named Kalpana died on Wednesday evening and the carcass was cremated on Thursday following directions to minimise human-animal interface, an official from the Environment Ministry said.
The tigress had grown frail. Post-mortem revealed high creatinine levels, the official said.
Nine CRPF personnel on Friday tested positive for the novel coronavirus in Delhi, officials said.
The personnel underwent tests after ‘contact tracing’ was done in the backdrop of a head constable working as a nursing assistant was declared COVID-19 positive a few days back, they said. As many as 50 personnel have been quarantined after these cases came to light in the CRPF’s 31st battalion in the national capital.
The nine who tested COVID-19 positive include seven constables, a head constable and a sub-inspector rank officer, the officials said.
After an endless wait, the test samples of a 62-year-old COVID-19 woman patient, who has been in a hospital here for the past 48 days, returnednegative following which she was discharged on Friday. The patient, Shirley Abraham'ssampleshad returned positive 20 times,while her last two consecutive results were negative. She would be in quarantinefor 14 days, a government press release said.
State Health Minister K K Shailaja congratulated all the medicalpersonnel involved in the patient's treatment and care. The woman is the primary contact of the the three-member Ranni family from Italy who had returned to the state and had tested positive. (PTI)
In Kolkata, Yamraj chased the lockdown violators on streets while help poured in for sex workers in Delhi. Around 70 labourers who had planned to leave Delhi amid the lockdown were convinced by the police to stay back. Meanwhile, Khammam in Telangana is offering a home away from home to stranded migrant workers. Here is a curated list of some striking stories from across the country on Day 31.

For the first time, the West Bengal government Friday admitted that 57 coronavirus positive patients have died in the state. Of these, it said, 18 deaths were because of Covid-19 infection while the rest were due to co-morbidities. More details here.
The death toll due to the coronavirus pandemic in the US has crossed the 50,000 mark, according to Johns Hopkins University tally. The confirmed coronavirus cases on Friday exceeded 2.7 million globally, with more than 192,000 dead. Click here to follow our global coverage.
Pakistan extends coronavirus lockdown till May 9; cases rise to 11,155 Pakistan on Friday extended the partial lockdown imposed in the country by another two weeks as the number of people affected by the deadly virus rose to over 11,000. About 79 per cent of the total coronavirus cases in Pakistan are now locally transmitted, health authorities said. In the last 24 hours, 642 new cases were reported, taking the tally to 11,155 in the country, news agency PTI reported.
Although there has been so census, estimates say that art and crafts involves more than 130 lakh people in rural and semi-rural locations. Usually, December to March is their peak season — with increased tourism activity, and fairs and exhibitions like the annual Surajkund Crafts Mela. But with Covid-19 cutting their season short, many of them are staring at financial distress and loss of livelihood.



A probe has been launched into allegations of faulty and unfit Personal Protection Equipment (PPE) kits provided to the staff treating novel coronavirus patients at the Government Medical College in Amritsar.“PPE kits are not only unfit but also faulty. Wearing PPE kit is not enough. It is not any vaccine that will protect you after wearing it. It is a physical equipment and works only if it is fit on the body of medical worker. But sometimes we feel air moving inside PPE kit. It means PPE kit is not securing our body from virus,” said a doctor, not wanting to be named. More details here.
It’s one of the states with the highest literacy rate in the country, and true to its form, it is now delivering books right to people’s doorsteps. On April 18, NGO Young Mizo Association in Mizoram, started an initiative called the Kawtkai Library (‘kawtkai’ translates to doorstep in Mizo) which brings people a book of their choice
“Every locality has a library in Mizoram,” said B. Lalmalsawma of the YMA, “Ramhlun South, our locality, does too. We realised that people are bored during the lockdown, and what better way to utilise time than reading?” Read the full story by Tora Agarwala here

With 1,752 new positive cases in last 24 hours, India recorded its highest single-day spike in Covid-19 cases on Friday, taking the country’s tally to 23,452. The death toll stood at 723. As many as 17,915 Covid-19 cases are active while at least 4,813 people have been cured and discharged so far. 
Here's what has happened today:

Once the virus enters the body, it can cause discomfort when it reaches the air passages on the outside of the lungs. These passages conduct air into and from the lungs. The virus injures the lining of the passageways, and the body responds with an inflammation, which in turn irritates the nerves in the lining. That is when an infected person coughs. Click here to read our explainer.
More than 2.7 million people have been reported to be infected by the virus globally and 190,985 have died, according to John Hopkins tally. The US leads the chart with 869,000 cases and 49,954 deaths. The next worst-affected countries are Italy on 25,549 deaths, Spain on 22,157 and France on 21,856.
Here's what's happening globally:
*Donald Trump says US is very close to finding a vaccine for Covid-19
*Pakistan’s coronavirus cases rise to 11,155; 79% cases locally transmitted
*Philippines extends capital’s lockdown to May 15
*Spain records lowest number of daily coronavirus deaths in over a month
*NASA develops high-pressure ventilator to fight Covid-19
*South Africa to begin phased easing of lockdown on May 1
*Indonesia's capital relocation on hold, shifts budget to fight pandemic
*Coronavirus will make life hard for a long time, Angela Merkel says
At a review meeting with senior officers, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityananth said that the government will bring back labourers stranded in other states because of the coronavirus-forced lockdown. He also directed officials to prepare an action plan in this regard.
IPS officer Madhur Verma shared a photograph of two cops sleeping on the ground saying 'Proud of these #CoronaWarriors'. The picture is being widely circulated on social media.
Isn’t comfortable bed and an eight hour sleep such a luxury ?Yes it is... if you are a cop !Proud of these #CoronaWarriors pic.twitter.com/3H9ZrZupNp
deleting_message
 A medical professional offers aide to a patient outside Delhi's AIIMS.
The Health Ministry has announced that 78 districts, from at least 429 where cases have been reported so far, have recorded no new infection over the last 14 days. Of these, it said, 12 districts reported no new cases in the last 28 days.
At the media, C K Mishra, environment secretary who heads the empowered group on medical infrastructure, made a global comparison of where countries stood by the time they had conducted 5 lakh tests.
He said that the US reached the mark on March 26 with 80,000 cases, Italy on March 31 with 100,000 cases, UK on April 20 with 120,000 cases and Turkey on April 16 with 80,000 cases. India, which had tested 5,00,542 samples by Thursday morning, reached that line on April 22 with about 20,000 cases.
 78 districts, from at least 429 where cases have been reported so far, have recorded no new infection over the last 14 days.
“If we make a comparison, we seem to be doing well with our strategy, which is intensely focussed on areas of high positivity — of course, countries like South Korea have done better. This shows that our testing strategy has been targeted and continues to expand. It’s an evolving strategy, we are learning every day and as we are learning we are expanding...we will expand it again in future as the scale of the challenge keeps changing,” Mishra said.
According to the Health Ministry’s latest figures, India reported 1,229 new cases and 34 deaths in the last 24 hours, taking the overall tally to 21,700 cases and 686 deaths. About 19.8% patients — 4,324 — have recovered from the disease, the figures show.
According to the Ministry, the list of 12 districts that did not report a fresh case in the last 28 days or more, include eight new ones: Chitradurga (Karnataka), Bilaspur (Chhattisgarh), Imphal West (Manipur), Aizawl West (Mizoram), Bhadradari Kothagudem (Telangana), Pilibhit (UP), SBS Nagar (Punjab) & South Goa (Goa).
The list of 78 districts from 23 states/UTs that have not reported any fresh cases during the last 14 days include 33 new ones in nine states: Hailakandi and South Mancachar (Assam); Kaithal (Haryana); Ernakulam, Idukki, Thrissur and Alappuzha (Kerala); Vidisha (MP); Cuttack, Kendrapara and Dhenkanal (Odisha); Moga, Amritsar and Muktsar (Punjab); Sidipet, Pedapally, Nagarkurnool, Mulugu, Janagaon, Mahabubabad, Mahaboobnagar and Sangareddy (Telangana); Udhamsingh Nagar and Almora (Uttrakhand); Hathras, Allahabad, Barabanki, Lakhimpur Kheri, Maharajganj, Shahjahanpur, Hardoi, Kaushambi and Pratapgrah (UP).
A low-cost method of testing coronavirus or COVID-19 developed by researchers at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Delhi, has been approved by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). According to a press release from the institute, the COVID-19 detection assay was developed by a research team from IIT-Delhi’s Kusuma School of Biological Sciences (KSBS).
 This makes IIT-Delhi the first academic institute to have obtained ICMR approval for a real-time PCR-based diagnostic assay.
The institute claims “the assay was validated with a sensitivity and specificity of 100 per cent”. This makes IIT-Delhi the first academic institute to have obtained ICMR approval for a real-time PCR-based diagnostic assay.
A group of 101 retired civil servants have written an open letter to Chief Ministers of all states and Lieutenant Governors of all Union Territories against reports of harassment of Muslims in some parts of the country after coronavirus cases were linked to the Tablighi Jamaat congregation in New Delhi’s Nizamuddin area.
“The Jamaat was criticised for ignoring the principles of social distancing when cases of Covid-19 had started emerging in the country. Although this was hardly the only incident of such gatherings, both political and religious, sections of the media hastened to give a communal colour to Covid-19, including attributing motives to the Tablighi Jamaat in spreading the virus to different parts of the country,” the group, under the banner of the Constitutional Conduct Group, said in the letter written Thursday.
Don't miss these articles on Coronavirus from the Explained section:
‣ How coronavirus attacks, step by step
‣ Mask or no mask? Why the guidance has been shifting
‣ Besides a face cover, should I wear gloves when I go outdoors?
