Coronavirus July 8 Highlights: Kerala reports 301 new cases, 90 through local transmission in village
Kerala on Wednesday reported 301 new Covid-19 cases, Out of which 90 were through local transmission. The positive cases include 14 migrant workers from West Bengal, who have been camping in Palakkad since June 19.
India has reported 482 deaths and 22,752 Covid-19 cases in the last 24 hours, pushing the total number of casualties to 20,642 and total number of infections to 7,42,417 which includes 2,64,944 active cases, and 4,56,831 people who have been treated and discharged so far, according to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The number of recovered cases exceeded that of the active cases by 1,91,886 on Tuesday.
Globally, the total number of coronavirus cases has reached 11,798,678 while deaths stand at 543,535, according to Johns Hopkins University.

A coastal village on the outskirts of Kerala’s capital Thiruvananthapuram has emerged as a sensitive Covid-19 hotspot after over 100 people in the area tested positive for the virus in last one week. Poonthura, a fishing village located 12 km off Thiruvananthapuram, has been described by government officials as an area witnessing ‘super spread’ of the coronavirus infection. A super spread indicates the transmission of the virus from one or more persons to a large group of people through primary or secondary contact. The origin of the infection in the area is suspected to be a wholesale fish vendor at the local Kumarichanda market. Click here to read our report.
All India Mahila Congress president and former Assam MP Sushmita Dev tested positive for COVID-19 on Wednesday. Dev — who was MP from Assam’s Silchar seat from 2014-2019 — confirmed the news on Twitter, saying that she was asymptomatic. “My report as signed by Department of Microbiology, Silchar Medical College, Cachar, Assam says I have tested positive for COVID 19. I am asymptomatic as of now. I thank everyone for their concern & calls” wrote Dev. Meanwhile, Assam reported 397 recoveries today and 6 deaths. Total active cases stand at 4,585.
My report as signed by Department of Microbiology, Silchar Medical College, Cachar, Assam says I have tested positive for COVID 19. I am asymptomatic as of now. I thank everyone for their concern & calls. ????
West Bengal witnessed its highest ever single-day spike on July 8 with 986 new COVID-19 cases and 23 recorded deaths in the past 24 hours. According to figures provided by the West Bengal Government's Department of Health and Family Welfare, there are 7,705 total active cases in the state with 24,823 recorded cases since it was first detected in the state.
Tamil Nadu on Wednesday reported 3,756 COVID-19 cases and 64 fatalities, taking the tally to 1.22 lakh while the death toll went up to 1,700, the health department said. The doubling time of coronavirus cases in Chennai, meanwhile, improved to 25.42 days as of Tuesday from 18 days on June 28, according to the Greater Chennai Corporation. Chennai recorded 1,261 new cases today, Madurai 379 and nearby Tiruvallur and Chengelpet 300 and 273 infections respectively, a health department bulletin said. The fresh cases here today conformed to the recent trend of a dip in fresh infections following an intense lockdown between June 19 and July 5. The state capital posted 1,203 cases on Tuesday and 1,747 on Monday. Tamil Nadu’s tally stood at 1,22,350 and Chennai’s share was 72,500.
Eighty more people tested positive for COVID-19 in Uttar Pradesh's Gautam Buddh Nagar on Wednesday, pushing the tally in the district to 3,010, an official data showed.
Also, 266 patients got discharged since Tuesday, bringing down the number of active COVID-19 cases in the district to 969, according to data released by the Uttar Pradesh Health Department for a 24-hour period.
So far, 2,011 patients have got discharged after they recovered from COVID-19 in Gautam Buddh Nagar, with the recovery rate rising to 66.81 per cent from 60.81 per cent on Tuesday, it showed. (PTI)
Lieutenant Governor Anil Baijal and Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Wednesday inaugurated a 500-bed COVID care centre at the Commonwealth Games village here. Doctors For You, a not-for-profit organisation, supported the Delhi government in setting up the facility which is attached to the Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Hospital.
Inaugurated 500 bedded CWG Village Covid Care Center with Hon’ble CM @ArvindKejriwal, Dy CM @msisodia & CS.My appreciation for DDMA & ‘Doctors For You’ (Volunteer group of Doctors NGO) for establishing this centre in record time of 6 days. pic.twitter.com/tVx7jnOEbd
With schools being shut till July 31, a school in Delhi's Khajoori area is now serving as a Covid-19 testing centre. 


The Bihar government on Wednesday announced to implement strict lockdown in Patna from July 10 to 16 due to an alarming surge in Covid-19 positive cases. Under this lockdown, Government offices and Public corporations shall remain closed. All private and commercial establishments shall remain closed. However, Ration, Dairy, Vegetables and meat shops shall remain open from 6 am to 10 am and 4 pm to 7 pm. All places of worship and religious gatherings shall also be closed.
As many as 22,752 cases of Covid-19 were reported in India in the past 24 hours, taking the country’s overall caseload to 7,42,717 on Wednesday. The death toll touched 20,642, with 482 deaths reported in a day, data from the Health Ministry showed. There are 2,64,944 active cases and around 61.53 per cent of patients have recovered so far.
Here's are the top developments of the day:
-UP govt to undertake a 3-day special campaign to curb COVID-19 spread
-Lockdown in containment zones of Bengal for 7 days from July 9-Jharkhand CM Hemant Soren home quarantined
-Patna to remain under lockdown from July 10
-Odisha Covid-19 death toll rises to 48
-Over 5,000 new cases in Maharashtra
-No possibility of extending lockdown in Tamil Nadu, says CM Edappadi K Palaniswami
The number of COVID-19 cases recorded per day in India may surge to 2.87 lakh by early 2021 if a vaccine or treatment isn’t developed soon, researchers from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) warned in a recent study.
In their study, titled ‘Estimating the global spread of COVID-19’, Researchers Hazhir Rahmandad, TY Lim and John Sterman of MIT’s Sloan School of Management have predicted that India may record the highest number of fresh cases in the world by the end of winter in 2021. Further, without a vaccine or treatment, over 24.9 crore cases and 18 lakh deaths may be reported globally by spring next year (March-May), the study claimed.
Kerala breaks new record in daily Covid-19 cases. Today, the state reports 301 Covid-19 cases, 90 of them through local transmission. The positive cases include 14 migrant workers from West Bengal, who have been camping in Palakkad since June 19.  
Lockdown will be imposed in containment zones in West Bengal for seven days from 5 pm Thursday to check the surge in novel coronavirus cases, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee said on Wednesday.
The situation will be reviewed after the seven days and the next course of action will be decided, she said at the state secretariat in Kolkata.
"This lockdown in containment zones in West Bengal will continue for seven days from 5 pm Thursday. Will review the situation after seven days and then decide next course of action on lockdown," the chief minister was quoted saying by PTI.
Cricket icon Sachin Tendulkar on Wednesday inaugurated a Plasma Therapy Unit for treating COVID-19 patients at the Seven Hills Hospital in suburban Andheri and urged those who have recovered from the deadly infection to help save lives by donating blood plasma.
The unit is an initiative of the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC). It will offer convalescent plasma therapy to COVID-19 patients using donated blood plasma from those who have recovered.
"We are facing an unprecedented challenge to our health in the form of the COVID-19 pandemic. Rising to the occasion, our doctors, nurses, paramedical staff, the police, municipal and government staff are working tirelessly to deliver effective healthcare to all those affected by the virus," Tendulkar was quoted as saying by news agency PTI.
The coronavirus has infected nearly 11.8 million people worldwide and killed over 500,000. The United States has the most number of infections, over three million, followed by Brazil (1.6 million), India (7,00,000) and Russia (6,00,000).
Here's what happened today:
*Riots spark in Belgrade by new lockdown, dozens injured
*US notifies UN on decision to withdraw from WHO
*China defends WHO, lashes out at US move to withdraw
*Japan banks lend at record rate in June
*Colombia extends lockdown till August 1
*UK faces ‘job crisis’ as demand for employment falls
*WHO acknowledges ‘evidence emerging’ of airborne spread of Covid
Click here to follow our Covid-19 global updates.
The number of Covid-19 cases in Madhya Pradesh's Indore district rose to 4,998 after 44 new cases were found in the last 24 hours, a health official said on Wednesday.
Besides, 252 people have so far died of coronavirus in the district, Indore's Chief Medical and Health Officer Praveen Jadia said.
"Since the outbreak of the disease here on March 24, 4,998 COVID-19 patients have been found so far out of the total 96,090 samples which were tested," Jadia was quoted as saying by news agency PTI.
Till now, 3,871 patients have been discharged after recovery, he added.
The number of COVID-19 cases recorded per day in India may surge to 2.87 lakh by early 2021 if a vaccine or treatment isn’t developed soon, researchers from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) warned in a recent study.
In their study, titled ‘Estimating the global spread of COVID-19’, Researchers Hazhir Rahmandad, TY Lim and John Sterman of MIT’s Sloan School of Management have predicted that India may record the highest number of fresh cases in the world by the end of winter in 2021. Further, without a vaccine or treatment, over 24.9 crore cases and 18 lakh deaths may be reported globally by spring next year (March-May), the study claimed. More details here.
Jharkhand Chief Minister Hemant Soren has quarantined himself at his Ranchi residence after a cabinet minister whom he had met recently tested positive. The chief minister had recently come in contact with Drinking and Sanitation Minister Mithilesh Thakur who has tested positive for COVID-19. Soren has also urged staff members of the Chief Minister's Office to go into home quarantine.
As the number of diagnostic tests for novel Coronavirus is increasing in the country, so is the positivity rate. This means more number of people, from among those who are being tested, are found to be infected with the disease. The positivity rate had crossed 6 per cent mark for the first time on June 20, and has risen swiftly thereafter. At present, the positivity rate is around 7.09 per cent.
Positivity rate is a good indicator to assess the prevalence of the disease in the community. The rise in positivity rate means that the growth in the number of confirmed cases is outpacing the growth in the tests being conducted. And this is happening mainly because the criteria for testing is still restrictive in most states.
Jharkhand CM Hemant Soren quarantines himself at Ranchi residence after minister whom he met tests COVID-19 positive: Statement (PTI)
Tamil Nadu Electricity Minister P Thangamani has been tested positive for COVID-19. He participated in a couple of events yesterday at the secretariat with CM Edappadi and other officials. The total number of MLAs who have tested #COVID19 positive in the state has risen to 11.
TN Electricity Minister P Thangamani has been tested positive for #COVID19. He participated in a couple of events yesterday at the secretariat with CM Edappadi and other officials. The total number of MLAs who have tested #COVID19 positive in #TN has risen to 11. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/ZthLZhIvHN
 Coronavirus LIVE updates: Once seen as key in Covid fight, experts now say need for ventilators exaggerated. (Express Photo)
In March, ventilators were considered vital to treat serious Covid cases, and with the countrywide inventory at an estimated 47,000, manufacturers raced to ramp up production. But now, with health experts pointing to a shift in treatment to non-invasive oxygenation, these manufacturers are staring at excess stocks and hoping for export channels to be opened.
That’s not all. Many smaller manufacturers, who tied up with majors like Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL), Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) and Maruti Suzuki India in anticipation of a surge in demand, say they are facing a crunch.
Says Dr V K Paul, the NITI Aayog member who heads the Centre’s Covid task force: “The lockdown gave us time to reassess the ventilator situation and we are in a comfort zone now. While we were largely relying on imports, India has shown that large volumes of ventilators can be manufactured indigenously within a short period and excess capacities can surely be exported later.”
Meanwhile, at least three of the hospitals – AIIMS in Delhi, SRM Hospital and Research Centre in Kancheepuram and King George Hospital in Vishakhapatnam — are learnt to still be awaiting ethics committee approvals to begin enrolling participants for the study. Other hospitals are awaiting site initiation visits and clearances to ensure their facilities are ready to conduct these trials.
Depending on the hospital, enrollment of participants is expected to begin between this week and the next, but the testing can only start once they receive stock of the vaccine. This will happen once Bharat Biotech receives a clearance from the Central Drugs Laboratory in Kasauli to use its vaccines in the trials.
In a bid to make the Covid-19 test “seamless and accessible” to all in Mumbai, the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) will from Wednesday allow testing for all, irrespective of whether they have symptoms or not, and without a doctor’s prescription or self declaration. The civic body will also conduct antigen tests in containment zones and hospitals.
This is the ninth time that BMC has changed its testing protocol, mostly in conformity with central guidelines. The latest change also came after the Union Health Ministry instructed states to increase their testing capacity.
The BMC said on Tuesday that all laboratories, including private ones, were free to conduct RT-PCR (real-time polymerase chain reaction) tests on any individual in accordance with Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) guidelines without prescription from a doctor, including for home testing.
 One of the passengers waves as they walk along the gangway during the boarding prior the first holiday flight of the Corendon Airlines Europe to the Greek destination Rhodos at the airport Erfurt-Weimar in Erfurt, Germany, Thursday, July 2, 2020. The tourist air traffic was interrupted for several months due to the corona pandemic. (AP Photo/Jens Meyer)
