India coronavirus updates, 12 June: Maharashtra Covid-19 cases surpass one lakh; Punjab tightens lockdown
India Coronavirus Latest Update: The number of coronavirus cases in the country surpassed 300,000 on Friday evening after Maharashtra, the major contributor to the surge in infections, reported 3,493 fresh Covid-19 samples. India on Friday for the first time recorded over 10,000 new instances of infection in a day, taking the total to 2,97,535. Going by the Health Ministry data, of the total coronavirus cases, as many as 8,498 fatalities have been recorded and 147,194 persons stand recovered.
Despite the surging coronavirus tally in the country, the Health Ministry said the doubling time of coronavirus cases in India has improved to 17.4 days currently from 15.4 days a couple of weeks ago. India Thursday went past the United Kingdom in terms of coronavirus cases to become the fourth worst-hit country, according to the Worldometer.
The Supreme Court Friday pulled up the Delhi government over mismanagement of dead bodies and treatment of Covid-19 patients in hospitals. It said the situation in the national capital is “horrendous, horrific and pathetic”. Of the total 34,687 coronavirus cases in Delhi, the state government has revealed 1,085 deaths and 12,731 recovered. Contrary to the current death toll as informed by the state government, three municipal corporations of Delhi on Thursday said that “there have been 2,098 funerals of Covid-19 positive patients” at the designated crematoriums and burial grounds under their jurisdiction so far. This is almost double the death toll released by the Delhi government on Thursday.
A look at the top developments today:
The number of coronavirus cases in Maharashtra, the major contributor of infections in India, crossed the one lakh mark on Friday after 3,493 people were found infected during the day, the state health department said. The total number of infections has now reached 1,01,141, it said. As the virus claimed 127 more lives on Friday, the death toll due to the infection jumped to 3,717, the department said in a statement.
Despite being the worst-hit state by the coronavirus, Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray, earlier in the day, dismissed rumours about a probable reintroduction of a total shutdown in Maharashtra. In a statement, Thackeray said, “Some television news channels and social media platforms are speaking about lockdown being reimposed and closure of all shops. But the government has not taken any such decision.”
The lockdown has not been reimposed. CM Uddhav Balasaheb Thackeray has appealed to the people to refrain from crowding. He has earnestly requested them to follow the Govt’s instructions and take necessary precautions to stay safe and take care.
— CMO Maharashtra (@CMOMaharashtra) June 12, 2020
Prime Minister Narendra Modi will hold a fresh round of consultation with chief ministers next week as the country gradually emerges out of the coronavirus lockdown, his office said on Friday. This would be the prime minister’s sixth round of consultation with the chief ministers, the last being on May 11.
Modi will hold the video-conferencing with chief ministers on June 16 and 17. States have been divided in two slots for the two-day virtual meet. Twenty-one states and union territories, including Punjab and some northeastern states, will hold interaction on June 16, the Prime Minister’s Office tweeted. The rest 15, including West Bengal, Delhi, Maharashtra and Karnataka, which have reported a surge in coronavirus cases, will interact with Modi on June 17.
The National Human Rights Commission on Friday issued notices to the Uttar Pradesh government, police and the municipal corporation of Balrampur over the removal of a body using a garbage collection van. The NHRC took suo motu cognisance of media reports that the body of a 42-year-old man, who died near a government office in Utraula block of Balrampur district in Uttar Pradesh earlier this week, was being dumped in a garbage van by municipal workers while some police personnel stood as mute bystanders, a statement said.
“The man died under suspicious circumstances at the gate of the Utraula Tehsil in Balrampur district. Then the body being carried in a garbage collection van under the supervision of the police is a shame. Such incidents are a stigma on humanity,” Kunwar Iqbal Haider, a member of the Uttar Pradesh Minorities Commission, told PTI. The UP Minorities Commission has also issued notice to the Balrampur administration.
Tightening the nooze on the lockdown, the Punjab government said inter-district movement will be allowed only with e-passes, except for medical emergency, and all non-essential shops and services will be closed on Sundays. However, shops dealing with essential commodities and services will be allowed to operate on all days, according to new guidelines issued.
According to the new guidelines, shops of essential commodities/services shall remain open on all days till 7 pm.
On Thursday, Chief Minister Amarinder Singh approved the detailed weekend and holiday restriction guidelines, reiterating that his government would take hard decisions, wherever and whenever needed, to prevent the community spread of COVID-19 in the state.
The Supreme Court took serious note of non-payment of salary and lack of proper accommodation to doctors engaged in fight against Covid-19, stating, “In war, you do not make soldiers unhappy. Travel extra mile and channel some extra money to address grievances.”
The bench of Justices Ashok Bhushan, S K Kaul and MR Shah said the courts should not be involved in the issue of non-payment of salary to health care workers and government should settle the issue.
“Country cannot afford to have dissatisfied soldiers in this war which is being fought against Corona,” the bench said.
“We saw report that doctors went on strike. In Delhi, some doctors have not been paid for past three months. These are concerns that should have been taken care off. It should not require court interventio,” the bench said adding, “You (Centre) need to do more. Must make sure their concerns are addressed.”
Nagaland has reported fresh 26 coronavirus cases, its highest single-day spike as on Friday, taking the state’s tally to 156 on Friday, Minister for Planning and Coordination Neiba Kronu said. The previous highest single-day spike was on June 4 when 22 cases were reported. Of the total 156 cases, 126 were active and 30 have recovered. he said. The minister also informed that all the positive persons are receiving medical care at the designated COVID-19 hospitals.
Another 9 new cases of COVID-19 +ve have been reported out of 251 samples tested at NHAK. 6 patients from Dimapur QC, 2 from Kohima QC & 1 from Peren QC.
Positive : 156
Active : 126
Recovered : 30
Death : 00
Update at 8:35 am, 12th June, 2020.
— S Pangnyu Phom (@pangnyu) June 12, 2020
Seven state governments have listed their demand for a total of 63 Shramik Special trains from the railways. Of the total, a maximum of 32 trains will depart from Kerala while the destinations of most trains will be West Bengal (23), the railways said.
Apart from Kerala, Tamil Nadu demanded 10 Shramik Special trains, followed by Jammu and Kashmir (9), Karnataka (6), Andhra Pradesh (3), West Bengal (2) and Gujarat (1). The Uttar Pradesh government is yet to give its requirement of trains, the railways said.
The move comes after the Railway Board chairman wrote to the chief secretaries to give their “residual demand” for such trains to ferry migrant workers back home. On May 29, June 3 and June 9, the Railway Board chairman wote to states that “the railways will provide the desired number of Shramik Special trains within 24 hours of the request”.
The Health Ministry said the doubling time of coronavirus cases in India has improved to 17.4 days currently from 15.4 days a couple of weeks ago. The country on Friday for the first time recorded over 10,000 new instances of the infection in a day. At the time the lockdown was imposed on March 25, the doubling rate of COVID-19 cases was 3.4 days, it said.
The cabinet secretary held a meeting chief secretaries, health and urban development secretaries of all states through a video link and they were asked to also pay special attention to the emerging epicentres of COVID-19 cases and undertake stringent containment measures to check the contagion, the ministry said. “Recovery rate of COVID positive cases continues to increase and is currently stands at 49.47 per cent,” the ministry said.
The Delhi High Court has said the Central government’s decision of phased reopening of lockdown was not taken in haste and it was done to ensure a proper balance between containing the spread of COVID 19 pandemic and making it certain that people are not forced to starvation. It was hearing the plea of a law student which had challenged the May 30 order of the Centre by which lockdown was extended in containment zones and reopening of activities was done in a phased manner outside containment zones.
A bench of Justices Hima Kohli and Subramonium Prasad said the government is expected to remain cognisant of the situation and evaluate it closely and if it is found that the rate of infection is going up, they can always review their decision and impose curbs, depending upon the situation. (PTI)
The Supreme Court on Friday asked the Centre and airline companies to discuss modalities for full refund of tickets for domestic and international flights that were cancelled in the wake of the lockdown.
A bench of Justices Ashok Bhushan, S K Kaul and M R Shah asked the Centre to take a stand on the issue and work out ways for full refund.
Besides this, the bench also directed that that no coercive action should be taken against private firms which failed to pay full wages to their employees during the lockdown period. It added that industries and labourers need each other and efforts must be made to resolve the dispute over wage payments.
The apex court also asked the Centre to file an additional affidavit within four weeks on the legality of March 29 circular by the government, which had directed the employers to pay full wages to employees for 54 days during lockdown period.
The Supreme Court today asked the Finance Ministry and the Reserve Bank of India to hold a meeting within three days to decide on waiver of interest on interest for deferred payments of instalments for loans during the moratorium period announced in the wake of the lockdown.
A bench of Justices Ashok Bhushan, S K Kaul and M R Shah said the question is not of waiver of complete interest for entire moratorium period but it is limited only to interest charged on interest by banks. It posted the matter for further hearing next week.
Six more people, including three Army personnel, have tested positive for the virus in Arunachal Pradesh, taking the total number of cases in the state to 67, a health department official said on Friday, PTI reported.
Three Armymen tested positive for the disease in Singchung sub-division of West Kameng district on Thursday night, while two persons were detected with the infection in Changlang and one in Longding, PTI reported. “The three Army personnel had recently returned from Bihar, while the two from Changlang had come from Noida and the one from Longding had travelled back from Gujarat. They are asymptomatic and lodged in quarantine centres,” State Surveillance Officer Dr L Jampa said.
With several villages in Goa going on self-imposed lockdowns owing to the virus spread, the opposition parties on Friday have slammed the BJP-led government for its faulty standard operating procedure (SOP).
On Friday, Goa Forward Party chief Vijai Sardesai demanded the imposition of President’s rule in Goa claiming that people have lost faith in the Pramod Sawant-led government. “People have no faith in the government’s SOPs, which is why you can see several local bodies imposing lockdowns in their areas,” he said.
After a series of trials, the single emergency helpline number 112, which will connect people in distress with the police, was made operational in five cities of Maharashtra, officials said on Friday.
Citizens in distress can get immediate assistance from police in the state on dialling the helpline number ‘112’ from their phones in Mumbai, Navi Mumbai, Thane, Nagpur and Pune, they added.
In the next phase, emergency services like police (100), fire (101), medical (108) and assistance to women in distress (1090) will be integrated with the 112 helpline number across the state, an official said.
Amid rising cases, Tamil Nadu Health Secretary Beela Rajesh was transferred by the state government on Friday. J Radhakrishnan, principal secretary and commissioner of revenue administration, was appointed as the new health secretary.
A top official in the state government said there was “nothing amiss, nothing controversial” about the transfer.
