With 47 of MP’s 63 COVID-19 deaths, Indore to get 50,000 rapid test kits
Coronavirus (COVID-19): INDORE, WHICH has the highest coronavirus death rate in the country, will get 50,000 rapid test kits that arrived in India from China on Thursday.
“Madhya Pradesh will become the first state to get the kits because of the situation in Indore. The Centre will start distributing the kits from Friday,” Additional chief secretary (health) Mohammed Suleman told The Indian Express on Thursday.
The number of positive cases in the biggest city of the state reached 842 on Thursday and the toll climbed to 47 with eight more deaths. The overall toll in the state is 63.
While Indore hit the headlines for a mortality rate that was much higher than the national average, the government said on Thursday that the city’s testing rate at 2,100 per million was one of the highest in the country.
Indore has so far taken 5,120 samples and had to send a special plane to Delhi carrying 1,142 samples to clear the huge backlog. Bhopal, which has collected nearly 2,500 samples in the last two days, is also sending samples to Delhi to clear backlog. A state plane will carry 1,400 samples to Delhi on Friday.
Meanwhile, the number of infected health department officials and people associated with them reached 95 on Thursday, nearly half the number of the positive cases from Bhopal. Suleman said 37 of those were health department employees up to class IV and the rest were people associated with them.
A week ago, the government ordered an inquiry to find out how so many health department officials based in Bhopal got infected from the virus, given that even states that have reported more cases than MP did not report anything like this. The inquiry is still on.
Don’t miss these articles on Coronavirus from the Explained section:
‣ How coronavirus attacks, step by step
‣ Mask or no mask? Why the guidance has been shifting
‣ Besides a face cover, should I wear gloves when I go outdoors?
‣ How the Agra, Bhilwara and Pathanamthitta Covid-19 containment models differ
‣ Can coronavirus damage your brain?
📣 The Indian Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel (@indianexpress) and stay updated with the latest headlines
