PM Modi Mann Ki Baat Highlights: ‘Will have to keep wearing masks in times to come’
PM Modi Mann Ki Baat Highlights: Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in his address to nation in his monthly radio programme “Mann Ki Baat”, said that India’s fight against coronavirus is people-driven. “In the middle of this pandemic, the farmers are ensuring that no one sleeps hungry in our country. Each person is fighting this war as per their own capacity. Some are waiving off house rent, also some labourers who are in quarantine at a school are whitewashing the school among others,” PM Modi said.
He mentioned that this virus has made masks an important part of our lives. “It doesn’t mean that all of those who are wearing are sick. Masks will become a new symbol of a civilised society. If you want to protect yourself and others from the disease, the use of a mask is important.”
Taking to Twitter on Saturday, Modi said that he had been getting ‘insightful inputs’ for this Mann Ki Baat speech and urged people to tune in to listen to him. “Have been getting several insightful inputs for this month’s #MannKiBaat. Do tune at 11 am tomorrow,” the Prime Minister wrote.
With more than a month into the lockodown, a measure to arrest the spread of coronavirus in India, the number of cases now stands at 26,496 with 824 fatalities. Maharashtra continues to be the worst-hit state with more than 7,500 cases and 323 deaths, and is followed by Gujarat (3,071 cases and 133 deaths) and Delhi (2,514 cases and 53 deaths).

PM Modi on Mann Ki Baat: This Ramzan, we should pray more than before to ensure that before Eid the world gets rid of this coronavirus. I am sure we will strengthen this fight by following orders of the local administration.
PM Modi on Mann Ki Baat: I commend the State Governments for their proactive role in dealing with COVID19 pandemic. Also, people are getting aware about the harmful effects of spitting in public. Such habits should go now. 
PM Modi: Due to COVID19, masks are becoming a part of our lives. It doesn't mean that all of those who are wearing are sick. Masks will become a new symbol of a civilised society. If you want to protect yourself and others from the disease, the use of a mask is important.
Nobody will blame India if the country don't export medicines to other countries. But we have extended help to countries abroad after ensuring adequate supplies in India. 
"In the middle of this pandemic, the farmers are ensuring that no one sleeps hungry in our country. Each person is fighting this war as per their capacity. Some are waiving off house rent, also some labourers who are in quarantine at a school are whitewashing the school among others," said PM Modi
PM Modi: Strict laws have been introduced to ensure action against those attacking the health workers. Health staff including, doctors, nurses, paramedics are the frontline fighters in this war against COVID-19. Hence such a step was necessary for their protection.
PM Narendra Modi thanks all for their support in combating coronavirus. All the citizens are fighting the war against Covid-19 in their own way. You can also join the fight as Covid warrior by logging in to covidwarriors.gov.in.
In this 64th episode scheduled on the 33rd day of the nationwide lockdown, PM Modi said India's fight against coronavirus is people-driven.
Here is #MannKiBaat April 2020. https://t.co/tkteUgjck9
In the previous episode of Mann Ki Baat on March 29, just days after he announced the first phase of the lockdown, he had apologised for the inconvenience caused to people by the unprecedented decision which he said had to be taken as “there was no other way to wage a war against corona". “Nobody likes to take such strong measures but it is the only option, seeing other countries and learning that the disease must be dealt with at the beginning before it becomes incurable," he said.
In this 64th episode scheduled on the 33rd day of the nationwide lockdown, PM Modi is expected to brief listeners on the measures taken by his government to fight the coronavirus. Taking to Twitter on Saturday, Modi said that he had been getting ‘insightful inputs’ for this Mann Ki Baat speech and urged people to tune in to listen to him. “Have been getting several insightful inputs for this month’s #MannKiBaat. Do tune at 11 am tomorrow,” the Prime Minister wrote.
Have been getting several insightful inputs for this month's #MannKiBaat. Do tune at 11 AM tomorrow. pic.twitter.com/bwPKfiXOYC
Welcome to The Indian Express Live blog. Stay tuned for latest updates on Prime Minister Narendra Modi's address to nation on “Mann Ki Baat” that starts at 11 am.
