Coronavirus June 11 Highlights: UP, Delhi, Telangana want Railway isolation coaches as cases inch closer to 3 lakh
As coronavirus cases across India show a steep rise, states have put forward their requisitions of isolation coaches from the Indian Railways. While Telangana and Delhi have requested for 60 and 10 coaches respectively, Uttar Pradesh has asked for a total of 240 coaches at 24 locations across the state.
The ICMR on Thursday said with Covid-19 prevalence as low as less than 1% in small districts in a large country like India, the nation is “definitely” not in the community transmission phase. Health Ministry Joint Secretary Lav Agarwal too put to rest questions on community transmission in Delhi saying, “If we get caught in grammar and let go of field action, we will suffer.” With nearly 10,000 fresh cases registered within a span of 24 hours, the Covid-19 tally in India rose to 286,579 on Thursday, according to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. India continued to remain the fifth worst-affected country after the US, Brazil, Russia and the UK.
Globally, as many as 7,357,794 people have been infected while 416,116 have died so far. The United States is by far the hardest-hit country, in terms of both confirmed infections and deaths. The total death toll in the country could hit the grim figure of 200,000 by September and expecting a dramatic decrease in positive cases will be a “wishful thinking”, an eminent Indian-American professor has warned.

To save more lives and reduce dependence on intensive care units (ICUs) and ventilators, the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation has decided ready at least 9,000 oxygen-supported beds by June 30 for coronavirus-afflicted patients experiencing breathlessness.
At least 10 per cent of Covid-19 patients, civic officials said, require oxygen support during treatment. Currently, Mumbai has 5,496 oxygen-equipped beds across public and private hospitals and at its jumbo facilities, like MMRDA grounds and NSCI Dome. Of them 71 per cent are already occupied, officials said. Read more here
Tamil Nadu recorded 1,875 COVID-19 cases on Thursday, bringing the state tally to 38,716. Among these, Chennai reported 1,407 positive cases, with the city’s total now 27,398.
Tamil Nadu recorded 23 deaths on Wednesday, putting the state toll at 349. Twenty of them had succumbed due to co-morbidities.
On Thursday, the number of active COVID-19 cases in Tamil Nadu touched 17,659. Till date, 23,981 men, 14,718 women and 17 transgenders have tested positive for the virus in the state. Read more
The European Union on Thursday announced plans to ease a ban on nonessential travel to the continent, with foreign students, non-EU nationals who normally live in Europe and certain highly skilled workers likely to be exempt from the coronavirus restrictions from July 1.
After the virus began spreading throughout Europe in March, the EU gradually extended a ban on all nonessential travel into the 27 member countries plus Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland until June 15.
Pune district reported 418 new coronavirus cases in the last 24 hours, taking the count to 10,812 on Thursday, while 11 more patients succumbed to the infection, a health official said. He said the death toll reached 460 in the district with 11 more patients succumbing to the infection in the last 24 hours. "Of the 418 cases, 292 were reported from Pune Municipal Corporation limits (city areas), which now has 8,893 patients. Also, 207 patients were discharged from hospitals," the official said. With 97 fresh cases in Pimpri Chinchwad, the COVID-19 count there now stands at 1015, he said. The number of positive cases in rural and Pune cantonment board areas has increased to 904, he said. PTI 
Tribal women are enacting a street play on Covid-19 to spread awareness about the deadly virus among mostly illiterate tea garden workers in West Bengal’s Jalpaiguri district. The awareness campaign through the street play gains significance as many migrant workers from the area are scheduled to return from other states. The play ‘Corona Bhagao Desh Bachao’ (ward off Covid-19, save the country) has been written by Maxima Toppo in Hindi and Sadri languages and is being enacted by other local women in the Gairkata tea estate. While one woman dons the role of the novel coronavirus, others act as doctors and policemen. For other remarkable stories on Day 4 of India's Unlockdown, read here
Eighteen more people tested positive for coronavirus in Tripura on Thursday. With these patients, Tripura crossed 900-mark of coronavirus patients. All of these patients were said to have got recent travel history. Fourteen among them hail from Sepahijala district alone while the rest from South Tripura, Gomati and Dhalai districts.
The state now has 916 cases, out of which 638 are active cases. Chief Minister Biplab Kumar Deb tweeted: "Out of 1430 samples tested for #COVID19, 18 people found #POSITIVE. All of them have travel history. The count includes : Sepahijala Dist:14 West, South, Gomati and Dhalai Dist 1 each. #TripuraCOVID19Count". Earlier today, the state government discharged 39 COVID-19 patients from a COVID care centre set up at Bhagat Singh Youth Hostel after they achieved full recovery.
Happy to share that 3️⃣9️⃣ COVID19 patients have been released today from Bhagat Singh COVID Care Center after their test results came NEGATIVE. So far 278 patients have been released in Tripura. I appreciate the efforts of Healthcare staffs. May the other patients recover soon!
Even as the number of Covid-19 cases in Maharashtra is set to cross the one lakh mark, tribal dominated Gondia district has become the first with zero active cases. Of 69 cases – mainly migrants from Mumbai, Thane and Ahmedabad, who were returning to Gondia – the last one tested negative and was discharged. On Thursday, there were zero active cases in the district.
Known as the ‘rice city’ due to the abundance of rice mills in the area, the district is surrounded by hills and forests and has a population of 14 lakh. Dr Shyam Nimgade, District Health Officer of Gondia, which is in the Nagpur division, told The Indian Express that there has not been a single case of local infection so far.
“After the phase-wise lifting of the lockdown, we started reporting cases of coronavirus disease. The first case was a month ago, when a nurse returned from Mumbai to Gondia. By mid-May, we had 100 people who had returned from Mumbai and Ahmedabad,” Dr Nimgade said. Read full story here

Supreme Court takes suo motu cognisance of issues arising out of treatment of Covid patients and disposal of dead bodies. Bench headed by Justice Ashok Bhushan to hear matter tomorrow.
A 57-year-old inspector with Gurgaon Police's Summons Branch died due to Coronavirus last night. Officials say he was due to retire next month. The district has recorded 6 covid deaths today, and 191 cases. 2,737 people have tested positive so far, 19 have succumbed.
Bengaluru now has 113 active containment zones. 17 fresh Covid cases were confirmed in the city today. Total active cases: 258
#COVID19: #Bengaluru now has 113 active #ContainmentZones. 17 fresh cases were confirmed in the city today. Total active cases: 258 (June 11). Discharges so far: 299. Deaths: 23. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/IR63J4aRrD
West Bengal on Thursday reported 440 fresh cases of COVID-19, taking the total to 9,768, the state health department said in its daily bulletin. Ten people died due to the infection during the day in different districts, raising the toll to 442, it said. Of the total fresh cases reported on Thursday, 117 were from Kolkata, it added.
Nine of the total deaths during the day happened due to co-morbidities, the health department said, adding that the state has so far witnessed 297 such fatalities. The active cases now stand at 5,338, it said. Since Wednesday, 209 people have been discharged from different hospitals in the state. (PTI)
Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh Thursday ordered stricter lockdown on weekends and public holidays, even as his state mulls stringent curbs, including mandatory testing certification, for those coming from Delhi.  The decision to tighten the curbs on weekends and holidays has been taken amid apprehensions of COVID-19 reaching the community spread stage in Punjab and projections indicating that the peak in the state was still two months away. (PTI)
Surgeons led by an Indian-origin doctor have performed a double-lung transplant on a patient whose lungs were damaged by COVID-19, a surgery believed to be the first of its kind in the US since the pandemic began.  Northwestern Medicine in Chicago said the recipient is a Hispanic woman in her 20s. The patient spent six weeks in the COVID ICU on a ventilator and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), a life support machine that does the work of the heart and lungs, the hospital said. By early June, the patient's lungs showed irreversible damage. The lung transplant team listed her for a double-lung transplant, and 48 hours later, performed the life-saving procedure a the hospital. (PTI)
Delhi records 1,877 cases in a single day.

Three more persons tested positive for novel coronavirus in Andaman and Nicobar Islands, taking the total count of confirmed cases in the Union Territory to five on Thursday, officials said. The newly infected persons are family members of the returnee from Chennai by a flight on June 7, who had tested positive four days back. They have been admitted to G B Pant hospital here, where the man is undergoing treatment, the sources said. (PTI)
Nepal on Thursday reported 250 new COVID-19 cases, taking the country's total count to 4,614.  According to the Ministry of Health, the new cases include 20 women. However, 187 infected people, including 8 women, have been discharged after successful treatment. With this, only 63 active corona patients have been added in the country in a single day, it said. There are currently 3,738 active COVID-19 patients undergoing treatment at different hospitals across the country. Till date, 15 people have died of coronavirus in Nepal. (PTI)
New York City announces schemes to boost economy, especially for the small producers hit hard by the pandemic.
Mayor Bill de Blasio gives an update on New York City's reopening https://t.co/aLz0kcLxTw
As coronavirus cases across India show a steep rise, states have put forward their requisitions of isolation coaches from the Indian Railways. While Telangana and Delhi have requested for 60 and 10 coaches respectively, Uttar Pradesh has asked for a total of 240 coaches at 24 locations across the state.
Himachal Pradesh has reported 458 COVID-19 positive cases till now including 179 active cases, 262 recoveries, and 6 deaths, said State Health Department.

India's tour to Sri Lanka, which was scheduled to take place later this month, has become the latest series to be postponed due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, said International Cricket Council.
 Coronavirus India LIVE updates: A boy at Delhi's Sarojini market after the easing of lockdown restrictions (Express Photo by Amit Mehra)
The Parliament may go for a hybrid monsoon session, with some members being physically present in the House and others attending on a virtual platform, sources said. In other news, due to a surge in coronavirus cases, Rajasthan on Wednesday sealed its borders with other states for a week.
The expected surge in novel coronavirus cases following relaxations in the nationwide lockdown looks set to begin soon, with several states showing upward deviations from their trendlines in the last few days.
Jammu and Kashmir and Haryana reported an unusually high number of new cases on Sunday; Uttar Pradesh has seen two big jumps in the last three days; Assam and Tripura have been growing at over 10 per cent every day for more than a week now; and Karnataka has risen swiftly in the last few days to make an entry into the list of top 10 states with the largest caseloads.
Other states like West Bengal, Uttarakhand, Chhattisgarh and Kerala have also been adding a large number of cases every day. Tamil Nadu and Delhi, which have the country’s second and third highest caseloads respectively, have been reporting between 1,300 and 1,500 cases each every day.
 Coronavirus India LIVE updates: Community transmission or spread is said to be taking place when the source of the contagion is not known. In pic: Cops get their temperature tested
Meanwhile, Delhi Health Minister Satyendar Jain said the source of Covid-19 infection in 50 per cent of the cases in the national capital was unknown, adding that it was up to the Centre to declare whether the city had entered the community transmission phase.
The health minister also indicated that the assessment of the local administration points towards the “third stage of spread”. “Director AIIMS Randeep Guleria has said (there has been community transmission) but Centre has not yet confirmed it,” Jain said.
According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), community transmission “is evidenced by the inability to relate confirmed cases through chains of transmission for a large number of cases, or by increasing positive tests through sentinel samples (routine systematic testing of respiratory samples from established laboratories)”.
In other words, community transmission or spread is said to be taking place when the source of the contagion is not known, i.e. when one is unable to trace an infection back to a carrier who has travelled in an affected area, or through contact with a person who has the disease.
 Coronavirus India LIVE updates: A lab technician extracts portions of a COVID-19 vaccine candidate during testing at the Chula Vaccine Research Center, run by Chulalongkorn University in Bangkok. (AP)
