PM Modi address to nation HIGHLIGHTS: Lockdown 4.0, Rs 20 lakh crore Covid-19 package and more
PM Narendra Modi Speech HIGHLIGHTS: A day after holding a marathon six-hour meeting with chief ministers, Prime Minister Narendra Modi Tuesday addressed the nation over the coronavirus crisis. This was his fifth address to the nation, including a video message, following the outbreak of Covid-19.
In his address, the prime minister announced a special Rs 20 lakh crore economic package due to the “unprecedented crises” caused by the novel coronavirus. This is 10 per cent of India’s GDP, he informed. He also said that the details of the package will be announced by Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman in the coming days.
The novel coronavirus in India has so far claimed 2,293 lives and infected over 70,000 people including 22,454 who have been treated and discharged.
#One virus has destroyed the world. We had never seen or heard about such a crisis ever before. This is definitely unimaginable for mankind. This was unprecedented. But humanity will not accept defeat from this virus. We have to not only protect ourselves but also move forward.
FM Nirmala Sitharaman presser HIGHLIGHTS: Rs 20,000 crores for MSMEs, EPF support and more
#Globally, more than 42 lakh people have been infected by a coronavirus, more than 2.75 lakh people have lost their lives due to the virus. In India too several families have lost their dear ones, I express my condolences to them.
#Before the outbreak, not a single PPE or N95 masks were made in India, but now we are making at least 2 lakh of PPE and 2 lakh N95 daily.
#I also announce a special economic package today. This will play an important role in making India making self-reliant. The announcements made by the govt over Covid-19, decisions of RBI and today’s package totals to Rs 20 lakh crore. This is 10 per cent of India’s GDP.

#This special economic package is for our labourers, farmers, honest taxpayers, MSMEs and cottage industry. The details of the package will be announced by Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman in the coming days.
#India’s self-reliance will be based on five pillars–economy, infrastructure, technology-driven system, vibrant demography and demand.
#The Covid-19 pandemic has taught us the importance of local supply chains very well. The global brands we see today were once local, they grew after their countrymen supported them. From today, all Indians should become vocal for our local products.

#The fourth phases of lockdown will be based on inputs we are getting from the states. Information on this will be given to you before May 18.
#This era of self-reliance will be our new pledge and new festival. We have to move on with a new resolve. Maintaining social distance and wearing masks will become the norm in the future.
