Coronavirus India HIGHLIGHTS: Maharashtra sees largest single-day spike in cases, Telangana extends lockdown till May 7
Maharashtra continued to be the worst-affected state with 552 Covid-19 cases on Saturday, the largest single-day spike, news agency PTI reported. Gujarat and Tamil Nadu also witnessed a surge in the number of cases with 367 new cases and 105 positive cases, respectively. Telangana, meanwhile, extended lockdown till May 7.
Kerala, which seemed to have flattened the curve, reported 13 more recoveries today, taking the total number of recoveries to 270 as opposed to 129 active cases at present. The Union Health Ministry said in its daily briefing Sunday that 1,334 new cases and 27 deaths were reported in the last 24 hours, taking the total number of novel coronavirus cases in India to 16,116 including 519 deaths. Health Ministry’s Joint Secretary Lav Aggarwal said that there will be no relaxation from April 20 for containment zones in hotspots and state governments can impose even more stricter norms in such areas.
With India entering 26th day of the lockdown, the Ministry of Home Affairs allowed the movement of stranded migrant labourers within a state in buses. However, it prohibited the inter-state movement of migrant labourers from where they are currently located. Follow Indian Express Covid-19 tracker for latest updates
Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh today ruled out any relaxation in the curfew in the state, except as needed to ensure COVID-19 free procurement of wheat, till May 3, when he will again review the situation. Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal also said the lockdown-related restrictions will not be relaxed in the national capital after April 20, pointing out that the number of positive cases were on the rise in the city and lifting prohibitions on economic activities may worsen the situation. Uttar Pradesh also decided to not give any relaxation from lockdown in districts with more than 10 coronavirus positive cases.
Meanwhile, the government banned the service of non-essential items by e-commerce companies, during the ongoing lockdown, four days after allowing such firms to sell mobile phones, refrigerators, and ready-made garments. (Click to follow our coverage of Covid-19)

Thane district neighbouring Mumbai was on Sunday night declared as a containment zone in light of surge in the number of COVID-19 cases, a senior official said. All the restrictions in place under the ongoing lockdown will remain in force without any change, and the relief stated in the April 17 notification for certain zones will not be available for Thane district, stated the order issued by district collector Rajesh Narvekar. "Consequent upon the increase in the number of COVID- 19 cases, the entire Thane district is being declared as a containment zone. "The areas classified as the containment zone include the municipal corporation limits of Thane, Navi Mumbai, Mira Bhayander, Kalyan Dombivili, Ulhasnagar, and Bhiwandi- Nizampur," it stated.
A one-and-a-half-month-old baby boy in Delhi has died of coronavirus becoming the country's youngest victim of the infection which also affected a 12-day-old infant girl in Bhopal, as COVID-19 cases jumped by over one thousand for the sixth straight day on Sunday prompting authorities to scale up rapid antibody based blood tests.
Ten staff members of the Alshifa Hospital in southeast Delhi's Okhla have been quarantined after they attended to a patient who tested positive for coronavirus. According to a senior doctor at the hospital, the patient was admitted on April 13 with anal abscess and was operated upon. He later complained of having chest pain and was asked to get tested for coronavirus at the Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital. The report confirmed that he was infected with the virus and was referred to another hospital, the doctor said. Ten staff members, including the doctor who did the surgery, have been quarantined at the hospital. They have got their tests done for the virus and the reports are expected by Tuesday, the doctor said.
As the country inches towards partial relaxation of lockdown post-April 20 as indicated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Tripura Chief Minister Biplab Kumar Deb held a marathon tele-conference discussion with 1,200 elected public representatives in the three-tier panchayat bodies and asked them to devise a proper exit strategy to make sure economy recovers after lockdown is lifted.
A press statement issued by the Chief Minister’s Office (CMO) today informed, Deb told the elected public representatives that his government has already prepared a plan to recover the loss incurred following the lockdown within the next 100 days. He added that elected representatives have a major role to play in this lockdown exit strategy and asked them to make plans for their respective areas as well.
“If needed, the elected representatives have to work overtime so that the post-lockdown economy returns to normalcy and various works of State and Central schemes get completed. A Pradhan, if he or she wants, can change the entire village,” the Chief Minister said.
Limited economic activities will begin in half of Madhya Pradesh from Monday but strict lockdown would be enforced in Indore, Bhopal and Ujjain and gutka and liquor will remain out of bounds. Announcing this, Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan on Sunday said the situation was under control in Indore and Bhopal but no relaxation will be given in these two most affected cities. Out of 52 districts, 26 districts have been affected by COVID outbreak with only 12 of them reporting double digit positive cases and three districts reporting just one case each.
Works like road construction and repairs, irrigation, agriculture and MNREGA activities will be allowed in 26 districts that have not reported a single case and those areas of other districts that are not in containment zones within the ambit of the guidelines issued by the Centre, Chouhan said while admitting that the pandemic has broken the back of the state. No movement of labours will be allowed from affected districts.
Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao on Sunday announced that the ongoing lockdown in the state has been extended to May 7, news agency PTI reported. Briefing reporters after a state cabinet meeting, he said the lockdown would be implemented in a tough manner in the state. He also said food delivery apps would not be allowed to operate in the state from Monday. 
Maharashtra on Sunday recorded the highest number of COVID-19 cases in a day, with as many as 552 persons testing coronavirus positive, taking the state tally of such cases to 4200. So far, 507 COVID-19 patients have been discharged in the state after recovery.
The current count of COVID19 patients in the state of Maharashtra is 4200 Today newly 552 patients have been identified as positive for Covid19. From these,507 Covid19 patients have been cured and discharged from the respective hospitals.#CoronaVirusUpdates #MeechMazaRakshak

On the eve of April 20, when some relaxations in the lockdown restrictions are expected, the Ministry of Health has issued an advisory against spraying humans with disinfectants, saying that not only does it not fulfil the purpose of killing the pathogen, it is also physically and psychologically harmful. It has listed out the harmful effects that the chlorine present in the disinfectant can have on humans.
“Spraying of individuals or groups is NOT recommended under any circumstances. Spraying an individual or group with chemical disinfectants is physically and psychologically harmful. Even if a person is potentially exposed with the COVID-19 virus, spraying the external part of the body does not kill the virus that has entered your body. Also there is no scientific evidence to suggest that they are effective even in disinfecting the outer clothing/body in an effective manner,” the advisory says. Read more here
The district administration of Kutch has decided to allow marriage ceremonies on condition that social distancing is maintained and not more than 20 people attend the functions.
“The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) guidelines stipulate that social distancing norms be adhered to during functions like funerals and that gathering of not more than 20 people be allowed. In conformation to these guidelines, we have decided to permit marriages from Monday onward on the condition that not more than 20 people will attend the function and that social distancing would be observed,” Kuldipsinh Jhala, resident additional collector of Kutch, told The Indian Express on Sunday.
Aviation regulator DGCA told airlines to stop taking bookings. Private Indian airlines were taking bookings on Sunday on select flights from May 4. Civil Aviation Minister Hardeep Singh Puri had advised airlines on Saturday night to open bookings only after the government takes a decision on resumption of passenger flights. The Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) issued a circular on Sunday evening, stating: 'All airlines are hereby directed to refrain from booking tickets... Further, the airlines may note that they shall be given sufficient notice and time for restarting operations.' The first phase of the lockdown was from March 25 to April 14. The second phase began on April 15 and would end on May 3.
pic.twitter.com/0U5YIy1zoV
Here are some of the striking pictures of the day.

A new study published in the peer-reviewed journal Clinical Infectious Diseases looks at how SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted within a household. As per this study, the secondary attack rate of the virus within the household is 16.3 per cent, and the risk of infection depends on the ages of the contacts and their relationship with the infected person, among others. Read more here
All government offices in Jammu and Kashmir will reopen on Monday morning as part of UT government’s decision to allow certain activity in non-hot spot areas as part of some relaxation in the lockdown. While all educational institutions and training institutes will remain closed till May 3, a government order said that all the offices dealing with essential supplies and services shall be fully functional. In other offices, officers of the level of undersecretary and above will be regularly attending duties with only 33 per cent of the non-gazetted staff present at a time as per roster prepared by respective head of offices. The Forest Department staff and workers who have been operating and maintaining zoo, nurseries, wildlife, carrying out firefighting operations in forests, watering plantations and patrolling have also been asked to work as usual. However, head of offices will have to take necessary steps.
Tamil Nadu reported 105 new positive Covid-19 cases today, including 50 from Chennai. The southern state also reported 46 more recoveries. Tamil Nadu, at present, leads states in the number of recoveries as 411 patients have been discharged from hospital so far.
105 people tested positive for #COVID19 in #TN today, taking the total to 1477. 50 people have been tested positive in #Chennai today. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/uFccKt0UIZ
Kerala, which has appeared to have flattened the curve, witnessed 13 more recoveries and reported only two new cases. A total of 55,590 persons have been kept under observation. Kasaragod, the most sensitive hotspot in the state, is no longer the district with most number of active cases. Only 42 cases in district. Kannur with 48 cases has more infected persons. Five northern Kerala districts account for 110 of 129 active cases
Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh ruled out any relaxation in the curfew in the state, except as needed to ensure COVID-19 free procurement of wheat, till May 3, when he will again review the situation. Captain Amarinder ordered strict enforcement of the curfew in all districts by the DCs, with no relaxation or concessions whatsoever even during the Ramzan period beginning this week. He also made it clear that no special curfew passes should be issued to the people on account of Ramzan. The Chief Minister directed the DCs to take firm steps to ensure that there is no crowding at the grocery and other shops selling essentials at this time, and all norms of social distancing are strictly adhered to.
The decision assumes significance in the backdrop of various relaxations given by the Union Ministry of Home Affairs for non-containment zones in the country, effective April 20.
Chhattisgarh Health Minister TS Singh Deo provided glimpses of a 100-beded Covid-19 hospital, which is being developed in state's Korba district. "It's a newly built ESIC hospital which is now being developed dedicatedly for Covid19 patients, with a separate accommodation facility for the working medical staff," he tweeeted. The state has reported 36 COVID-19 cases so far, with the majority of them in Katghora in Korba district, which has been declared a hotspot.
Sharing some pictures of a 100 beded Covid19 hospital being developed in Korba, Chhattisgarh.It's a newly built ESIC hospital which is now being developed dedicatedly for Covid19 patients, with a separate accommodation facility for the working medical staff 🏥 pic.twitter.com/ecg8XESIng
"Today, the world is in pursuit of new business models. India, a youthful nation known for its innovative zeal can take the lead in providing a new work culture," Prime Minister Narendra shares a few thoughts on LinkedIn, adding that India's energetic and innovative youth can show the way in ensuring healthier and prosperous future.
As the world battles COVID-19, India’s energetic and innovative youth can show the way in ensuring healthier and prosperous future. Shared a few thoughts on @LinkedIn, which would interest youngsters and professionals. https://t.co/ZjjVSbMJ6b
All seven COVID-19 patients in Goa have recovered from the infection and have been discharged. The last of the seven cases in the coastal state was detected on April 3, and since then all have been discharged  after their samples tested negative post treatment. Chief Minister Pramod Sawant posted on Twitter today, "A moment of satisfaction and relief for Goa as the last active Covid-19 case tests negative."
A moment of satisfaction and relief for Goa as the last active Covid-19 case tests negative. Team of Doctors and entire support staff deserves applause for their relentless effort. No new positive case in Goa after 3rd April 2020.#GoaFightsCOVID19 @narendramodi
Joint Secretary in the home ministry Punya Salila Srivastava said the Covid-19 situation has been very dynamic and the government is taking decision on a day-to-day basis. When the government has realised that allowing non-essential commodities to sell through e-commerce platforms may affect the proper implementation of the lockdown, the decision was reviewed and reversed, she said at a daily joint briefing on the COVID-19 outbreak.
Decision to allow e-commerce companies deliver non-essentials was reviewed because it was felt allowing too many things would impact #lockdown: Punya Salila Srivastava JS MHA @IndianExpress #COVID2019india
 The Red Fort in Old Delhi is lit with lamps and candles to observe the world heritage day on Saturday. The lights read, "hum jeetengay (We shall overcome this)". (Express photo by Amit Mehra)
Three districts — Patna (Bihar), Nadia (West Bengal) and Panipat (Haryana) — which had not reported any new cases for over 14 days, have seen fresh cases in the last 24 hours.
However, 22 new districts, spread across 12 states and Union territories, have not reported any fresh cases in the last 14 days. These are Lakhisarai, Gopalganj and Bhagalpur in Bihar; Dholpur and Udaipur in Rajasthan; Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir: Thoubal in Manipur; Chitradurga in Karnataka; Hoshiarpur in Punjab; Rohtak and Charkhi Dadri in Haryana; Lohit in Arunachal Pradesh; Bhadrak and Puri in Odisha; Karimganj, Golaghat, Kamrup Rural, Nalbari and South Salmara in Assam; Jalpaiguri and Kalimpong in West Bengal; and Visakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh.
The cloth material used to produce bright orange uniform worn by trackmen, and the plain white uniform worn by other railway staff will now used to make over one lakh washable face masks by Railways as the government makes wearing masks mandatory for public places and at work.
 The Common Man statue is wearing a protective mask due to coronavirus pandemic, in Mumbai (Express photo by Ganesh Shirsekar)
Northern Railway, which has been leading the charge in making COVID-19-related material, like isolation coaches, PPE coverall suits and hand sanitiser, has issued instructions to make the masks from the cloth in its store with the material meant for standard-issue uniform of railwaymen. Each mask will cost Rs 5.94, whereas the same quality mask in market costs around Rs 7.50, officials have found.
The recovery model being used in Kerala’s Kasaragod, which had reported the third case of COVID-2019 in the country — a student airlifted from Wuhan — has been showcased by the Union health ministry as one of the success stories of the fight against the pandemic in country. This is the second such showcase after the ‘Agra model’ was showcased recently.
 The administration relied on aggressive testing, technology, foolproof contact tracing on the ground and an effective public awareness campaign on social distancing
Kasaragod, which saw its first case in early February, has so far reported 168 cases and no deaths. So far, 113 people have recovered.
The administration relied on aggressive testing, technology, foolproof contact tracing on the ground and an effective public awareness campaign on social distancing, said joint secretary Lav Agarwal at the Union Health Ministry’s daily COVID briefing.
While there are hundreds of coronaviruses that cause diseases in animals such as pigs, camels, bats and cats, till date seven different types of coronaviruses have been identified that infect humans. What are they and what kind of symptoms do they cause?
 Doctors check temperature of patients outside a hospital building to avoid the spread of Coronavirus infection (EXPRESS PHOTO BY PRAVEEN KHANNA)
Coronaviruses are a large family of single-stranded RNA viruses that cause diseases in animals and humans. In humans, the viruses usually cause mild to moderate upper-respiratory tract illnesses such as the common cold. In the last two decades, more aggressive coronaviruses have emerged that are capable of causing serious illness and even death in humans. These include SARS-CoV, MERS and now SARS-CoV-2.
Before SARS-CoV-2 and MERS, SARS-CoV was the first example of a human coronavirus that could cause serious illness in humans in the form of severe acute respiratory syndrome. Other human coronaviruses such as OC43 and 229E are known to cause the common cold, whereas NL63 is associated with serious respiratory symptoms such as upper respiratory tract infection and pneumonia.
Explained: Guidelines for non-immigrant visa holders in the US amid COVID-19
Government offices to reopen with senior staff from April 20
In Mumbai, migrants lose hope, money: For how long, they ask
Govt wants to use PMJAY for free coronavirus testing in private labs, but 2 cr families missing from database
Don’t miss these articles on Coronavirus from the Explained section:
-How coronavirus attacks, step by step
-Mask or no mask? Why the guidance has been shifting
-Besides a face cover, should I wear gloves when I go outdoors?
