Coronavirus outbreak HIGHLIGHTS: MEA makes formal request to China to facilitate evacuation of Indians in Wuhan
Coronavirus outbreak HIGHLIGHTS: The Ministry of External Affairs Tuesday said the Centre has started preparations to evacuate the Indians stranded in China’s Wuhan, which is the epicenter of the outbreak of the deadly new coronavirus. This comes as the death toll in China due to coronavirus rose to 106 as the country continued to impose restrictions on travel to curb its spread. China’s national health commission said the number of confirmed cases now stood at 4,515, up from 2,835 a day before.
Three Indian men, who came from China Monday, have been admitted to the Ram Manohar Lohia (RML) hospital Delhi. “They walked into the hospital on their own with symptoms of cold and cough which is similar to the coronavirus outbreak,” Dr Minakshi Bharadwaj, medical superintendent of the hospital, said.
Also, a Tardeo resident in Mumbai and a Pune resident are among five in Maharashtra who are in a quarantine ward on suspicion of novel coronavirus (nCoV). In Kerala, over 430 people, most of whom returned from Wuhan province, are under observation. Meanwhile, about 45 Indian medical students at Jianghan University School of Medicine in Wuhan, who are stranded in their hostels, have sought immediate help from Indian authorities. Top sources in Air India said the airline has kept one of its 423-seater jumbo plane ready in Mumbai for the evacuation.
Countries across the world are scrambling to detect and control the virus, as authorities try to evacuate their nationals from China. Health officials in the United States Tuesday said at least 110 people were being evaluated for possible infection in the country, the New York Times reported.

In the wake of the outbreak of coronavirus in China, the Manipur government has taken up necessary precautionary measures to prevent the infiltration of virus into the state.
On Monday, the health department issued an order to depute a team of its officials along the Indo-Myanmar border for screening foreigners and Indians coming into the state from China and its neighbouring countries.
The team, comprising six health officials, will be stationed at the Indo-Myanmar Friendship gate number one and two at the Moreh border town and screen visitors coming into the Indian side.
Manipur shares 398 km of its border with Myanmar, an immediate neighbour to China. Manipur exports a huge quantity of goods from Myanmar, including China-made products through the Moreh border.
A total of 633 people, who returned to Kerala from China in recent days, are under observation for possible exposure to the novel coronavirus, state Health Minister K K Shylaja said on Tuesday. Of the 633, seven are under observation in isolation wards at different hospitals, according to officials. (PTI)
Democratic presidential candidate Elizabeth Warren Tuesday unveiled a plan that includes fully funding the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's pandemic prevention and response programs. The agency has faced stiff budget cuts under President Donald Trump, including to emergency funds and global health programs that were established following West Africa's Ebola epidemic in 2014.
“Like so much else, Trump's approach to keeping us safe from disease outbreaks is a mess,” Warren wrote in an online post announcing the plan. “But when he's gone, we can fix it.” Warren's proposal comes as the coronavirus has killed more than 100 people in China and the city at the center of the crisis, Wuhan, remains on lockdown. The US has confirmed cases in Washington state, Illinois, Southern California and Arizona. (AP)
Coronaviruses are a large family of respiratory viruses that can cause diseases ranging from the common cold to the Middle-East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) and the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), as per WHO. So far, the main clinical signs and symptoms reported in the Wuhan outbreak include fever, difficulty in breathing, and chest radiographs showing bilateral lung infiltrates. However, not enough is known about the epidemiology of 2019-nCoV to draw definitive conclusions and the intensity of the human-to-human transmission, and the original source of the outbreak. Read more
Several deadly new viruses in recent years have emerged in China — Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), bird flu, and now the novel coronavirus (nCOV). The reason could lie in the busy food markets dotting cities across the country — where fruits, vegetables, hairy crabs and butchered meat are often sold next to bamboo rats, snakes, turtles, and palm civets. Closely packed stalls in busy marketplaces, the Chinese taste for exotic meats, and the high population density of cities create the conditions for the spread of zoonotic infections, experts say. Read more
MEA makes formal request to China to facilitate evacuation of Indians from Wuhan-epicentre of coronavirus outbreak: Health Ministry statement.
Five suspected cases of the novel coronavirus which has spread fears in China, were reported in Haryana on Tuesday. Two of them are from Gurugram while the other three are from Faridabad, Nuh, and Panipat district. Director-general of state health services Dr Suraj Bhan Kamboj said that the patient have recently traveled to Haryana from China. Kamboj said that as of now, no positive case of coronavirus has been reported from any part of the country. Read more
Even as three Indians have been kept under observation in Delhi over a novel coronavirus scare, Tripura Tuesday issued a high alert across the state, especially in areas adjoining the Indo-Bangladesh border, to check if any patient carrying the virus is entering the country.
Speaking to indianexpress.com, Tripura Health Secretary Dr. Debashish Bose said the state health authorities have received an advisory from the Centre on Tuesday about the standard procedure prescribed to combat the infection. Read more
At least 100 students from Gujarat staying in China had expressed their desire to return home due to the outbreak of novel Coronavirus in Wuhan and some of them are coming back from Beijing on Tuesday and Wednesday, Chief Minister Vijay Rupani has said.
"Around 100 students from Gujarat had expressed their desire to come back from China. Some of them are coming back from Beijing today while remaining students would return tomorrow. We are working in coordination with Indian as well as Chinese government over the issue," PTI quoted the CM as saying.
External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar Tuesday said the Central government is planning to send an airplane to evacuate Indians stuck in China's Huebei province due to the outbreak of Coronavirus.
"Indian Embassy is in constant touch with the Chinese government. To evacuate students and other Indians from Wuhan, we are planning to send a plane there. Our efforts are on to bring them back. It will take some days. I urge people to trust the government on this," Jaishankar told reporters on his arrival at the Vadodara airport in Gujarat.
"No Indian student has been found to be affected by this virus. Parents need not worry about their children," he said before leaving for Kevadiya by road.
(PTI)
Taiwan raised its travel warning for China on Tuesday saying that people should avoid going unless absolutely necessary amid an outbreak of the new coronavirus there, and said it had begun to release stocks of face masks but would limit purchases.
Taiwan and China have close economic and cultural ties, and the island has reported seven confirmed cases of the virus so far. All of the more than 100 deaths so far have been in China, centred on Wuhan, the capital of Hubei province. (Reuters)
Hong Kong's leader Carrie Lam has announced that all rail links to mainland China will be cut starting Friday as fears grow about the spread of a new virus. Both the high-speed rail station and the regular train station would be closed, she said. (AP)
Demand for face masks and hand sanitising liquid has soared in Asian markets, as both local residents and visitors from China stock up on such products as a reassuring precaution against the new coronavirus.
In some parts of Asia, wearing of surgical masks has become mandatory, for now. "Sales of disinfectant products and hygiene masks have been rising since last week. First Chinese tourists came to our store to buy these products to bring back with them. They bought in bulk, like two or three boxes per person," said Varumporn Krataitohg, an employee of the NanBhesaj drugstore in central Bangkok.
Stocks of masks ran out quickly at outlets of South Korea's biggest 24-hour convenience store, CU, at airports, bus terminals and other transportation hubs.
Sales of soap, hand sanitizers and mouthwash more than doubled, said CU's parent company, BGF Retail. Overall, though, there were no immediate signs of major shortages in South Korea, which has reported four cases of the illness.
(AP)
Moscow city authorities have put in place special safety measures at hotels and tourist sites due to fears over the outbreak of coronavirus in China, Mayor Sergei Sobyanin said on Tuesday.
"We have taken special control of hotels and other places where tourists gather en masse. When alarming signs appear, emergency medical teams will be sent to carry out a thorough examination," he wrote on his website. (Reuters)
Reviewing the status of preparedness regarding the new coronavirus, Union Health Minister Dr Harsh Vardhan said, "We are in contact with Chinese authorities to bring back Indians from China. Once they are brought back they will be kept in quarantine for 2 weeks and necessary medical facilities will be provided to them." (ANI)
Oil futures were set for a sixth day of losses as the death toll due to coronavirus rose in China, but the heavy sell-off of recent sessions was curbed by output outages in Libya and OPEC comments designed to calm demand fears.
Brent crude was down 51 cents at $58.81 a barrel at 0925 GMT, having hit a three-month low of $58.50 on Monday as the virus outbreak triggered a global sell-off of riskier assets.
US West Texas Intermediate was down 32 cents at $52.82 a barrel, after slipping to its lowest since early October in the previous session at $52.13. Both contracts are on track for their worst monthly falls since May.
(Reuters)
Government starts preparations to evacuate Indians from Wuhan, Ministry of External Affairs said in a statement. Indian embassy is coordinating with Chinese authorities, the statement added.
MEA: Govt starts preparations to evacuate Indians from Wuhan. Indian embassy coordinating with Chinese authorities. @IndianExpress
So far, 20 samples from across India have been sent to NIV Pune for testing. They have all tested negative for the coronavirus.
The World Health Organization's director-general said on Tuesday he is confident in China's ability to control and contain the spread of a new coronavirus, China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs said. At a meeting with authorities in Beijing, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said he approved of the Chinese government's measures to curb the outbreak so far, according to a statement posted on the foreign affairs ministry's website.
Japanese shares slipped on Tuesday, with the Nikkei hitting a three-week closing low, as the new coronavirus spread in China and beyond, prompting authorities to take more drastic measures to contain its outbreak. The Nikkei share average shed 0.55% to 23,215.71, the lowest close since Jan. 8. The Topix, which includes all listed shares on the Tokyo Stock Exchange's main board, slipped 0.6% to a two-month closing low of 1,692.28.
 Coronavirus HIGHLIGHTS: Workers package medical masks in a factory in Nantong in eastern China's Jiangsu Province, Monday. (AP)
Fears over the virus led stocks to fall to the worst day since last October. On Tuesday, Asian shares slipped further; Japan's Nikkei was 0.7 per cent down, Australian shares fell 1.3 per cent and South Korea's Kospi index tumbled 2.6 per cent. On Monday, the BSE Sensex plunged 458 points or 1.10 per cent to 41,155.12. The broader Nifty ended 129.25 points, or 1.06 per cent. lower at 12,119.
As many as 436 people who have returned from China, mainly the Wuhan province, are under observation in Kerala for suspected exposure to the novel coronavirus. Of them, five are in isolation wards and others have been quarantined at home.
A state health department official said 148 persons were put under observation on Monday, taking the total figure to 436. “The number of people under observation can go up in the coming days if the return of Keralites from China continue. So far, no one has tested positive. We had sent six samples to the virology lab in Pune, but all of them tested negative. Tomorrow, we are sending a few more samples,’’ official said.
China's Beijing Public Transport Group Tuesday said it will suspend the majority of bus services into neighbouring Hebei province starting today to contain the spread of coronavirus, according to Reuters.
Also Read —
Coronavirus outbreak: Yet to get solid reply from embassy, say Indian students in Wuhan
Coronavirus: Two more kept in isolation ward, test results awaited
Coronavirus: 436 people under observation in Kerala
