Coronavirus India highlights: Bengal extends lockdown in containment zones; Maharashtra reports 6,700 fresh cases
The Health Ministry on Tuesday assured that there has been progressive decline in daily growth rate of new Covid-19 cases and that the total recovered cases are about 1.8 times the number of active cases. It also said that the fatality rate is 2.6 per cent and it is rapidly coming down.
Follow Coronavirus India Live Updates
Meanwhile, the ICMR chief acknowledged that there may be some airborne transmission with micro-droplets (less than 5 microns in size). “There has been hypothesis & suggestions by several scientists that there may be some airborne transmission with micro-droplets (less than 5 microns in size), he said adding that adding that physical distancing and use of masks remains important.
India, with over 9 lakh infections, is the third worst-hit country in the world after the United States (3,363,056) and Brazil (1,884,967). At least 23,727 people have succumbed to the disease in India, while 3,11,565 patients are undergoing treatment and 5,71,460 have recovered. In the last two months, the two trends that have remain nearly unchanged in India are an increasing positivity rate and a declining death rate. However, Delhi has seen a remarkable turnaround; the city reported less than 1,250 new infections Monday for the first time since June 1.
As global cases of the novel coronavirus crossed the 13 million mark Tuesday, the World Health Organization (WHO) warned the pandemic would get “worse and worse and worse” if the basics weren’t followed. Over 572,000 people have died from the virus worldwide.

Tamil Nadu recorded 4,526 cases of COVID-19 on Tuesday, taking the state’s overall tally to 1,47,324. Of the total cases, 1,078 were in Chennai, the city has reported 79,662 cases till date.
As many as 4,743 patients were discharged following treatment and 67 deaths were reported. With today’s fatalities, the state’s death toll rose to 2,099. Among the deceased, 65 had comorbidities.
The infection continued to surge in other districts in the state. Madurai reported 450 cases, Thiruvallur recorded 360 fresh cases followed by Virudhunagar with 328. Chengalpattu reported 264 cases and Vellore 194.
Tripura Tuesday announced a fresh lockdown in the border villages and towns of the state, to prevent the spread of Covid-19.
Speaking to reporters at the state secretariat Tuesday evening, Law Minister Ratan Lal Nath said, "The restrictions will be in force in areas within one km from the nearest Indo-Bangla International border in rural areas and in areas half km away from the border in urban areas.”
Tripura's capital city Agartala has the international border less than half a km away, and will be covered under the new restrictions.
Nath said emergency services like medical shops, groceries and milk vans will be allowed. People are to confine themselves at home and move out only for medical emergencies or other severe necessities.
These border lockdown restrictions will continue for a week, after which the government will assess the situation.
The government has also stressed on extensive sample collection and testing through primary health centres (PHC) and community health centers (CHC) spread across the state.
In a late evening Tweet, Chief Minister Biplab Kumar Deb said 90 new Covid-19 cases had been reported on Tuesday, with the highest number in West Tripura. Debraj Deb
Several MPs who attended parliament's PAC meeting last week have gone into home quarantine after a Lok Sabha Secretariat official attached to the committee tested positive for COVID-19, sources said on Tuesday. As many as 17 MPs attended the Public Accounts Committee meeting on July 10. Rajiv Mehrishi, the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG), was also present in the meeting. An official of Lok Sabha Secretariat, attached with PAC, who attended the panel meeting tested positive for COVID-19, the sources said. When contacted PAC Chairman Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury confirmed that an official was found to be positive for coronavirus. According to the sources, Lok Sabha secretariat officials informed the members about the official and requested them to take necessary precautions. Thereafter, several MPs went for home quarantine of seven days, the sources in the Secretariat said. When asked, BJD MP Bhartruhari Mahtab, a member of the panel, said he was in self-quarantine.
The West Bengal government on Tuesday extend the total lockdown in containment zones till July 19. According to a notification by the Home Department, the rigorous containment in these areas would be extended from July 15 to July 19. These zones are located in and around Kolkata, besides Jalpaiguri, Malda, Cooch Behar, Raiganj and Siliguri, it said. The total lockdown was enforced in the containment zones from 5 pm of July 9 to stem the spike in COVID-19 cases.
Here's news on coronavirus from across the country and globe today 

Maharashtra's COVID-19 tally rose to 2,67,665 on Tuesday with the addition of 6,741 new cases, state health department said. With 213 new deaths in a day, the fatality count increased to 10,695, it said.

Punjab cabinet minister Tript Rajinder Singh Bajwa tested positive for the novel coronavirus on Tuesday, the first minister in the state to contract the infection, a health official said. The Rural Development and Panchayats minister had undergone a COVID-19 last Friday after his department's director tested positive for the disease. The samples of Bajwa, who is also the higher education minister, were collected for the second time after the first report had come negative on Saturday. "He (Bajwa) has tested positive for coronavirus," Health Department Director Avneet Kaur said here. "His samples were collected again on Tuesday and his report confirmed him to be positive."
Kerala's daily covid cases jumps to 608 on Tuesday, the highest single day hike so far with 396 cases of Local transmission, the state government has deputed IAS officials to all 14 districts to help the districts.
Eight people who allegedly indulged in black marketing of emergency drugs used for COVID-19 patients were taken into custody in Hyderabad  on Tuesday. Based on specific information, police teams nabbed the eight, who were black marketing generic versions of Remdesivir and other drugs which are being used as anti-viral medicine for COVID-19 patients, Hyderabad Commissioner of Police Anjani Kumar told reporters. Police seized 51 Remdesivir 100 mg injections among other drugs besides Rs 55,000, from the possession of the arrested persons who are into surgical business, medical agency and medical distributor. The total worth of the seized items including cash was put at Rs 35.5 lakh, police said. Those arrested had formed a group and started black marketing of emergency drug for COVID-19 patients to earn easy money illegally and sold it at higher prices, they said. (PTI) 

Union Minister Jitendra Singh on Tuesday said he has gone into self-quarantine, after Jammu and Kashmir BJP chief, who had accompanied him to an official tour, tested positive for coronavirus. Singh, Minister of State for Personnel, had visited the house of his party colleague Waseem Bari, who along with his father and brother were shot dead by terrorist in North Kashmir's Bandipora last week. Singh, who is also a doctor, was accompanied by Raina, BJP general secretary Ram Madhav and other leaders during the visit to Bari's residence.
Have gone into Self-Quarantine with immediate effect from 4 PM today, after receiving the news about #Corona positive test of J&K BJP President Sh Ravinder Raina who had accompanied us from Srinagar to Bandipora on 12th July.
All government offices, except those providing essential services and banks, markets and shops would remain closed during weekends -- Friday 10 pm to Monday 5 am across Gautam Buddh Nagar, officials said on Tuesday.
District Magistrate Suhas L Y said new guidelines have been issued by the Uttar Pradesh government with respect to weekend restrictions and they will be applicable in Gautam Buddh Nagar henceforth, according to an official statement. During the period, special drives would be carried out at the district level for sanitation, water supply and door-to-door surveillance by local health department teams to check the spread of COVID-19 and other vector-borne diseases. 

*India, with over 9 lakh infections, is the third worst-hit country in the world after the United States (3,363,056) and Brazil (1,884,967).*At least 23,727 people have succumbed to the disease in India, while 3,11,565 patients are undergoing treatment and 5,71,460 have recovered.*The Health Ministry on Tuesday said that the total recovered cases are about 1.8 times the number of active cases while the  fatality rate, at 2.6%, is rapidly coming down.*Delhi saw a remarkable turnaround with the city reporting less than 1,000 new infections Monday for the first time since June 1.*Bihar government announced a complete lockdown in state from July 16-31 following the  worst single-day spike of 1,432 Covid-19 cases.
Globally *As cases of the novel coronavirus crossed the 13 million mark Tuesday, the World Health Organization (WHO) warned the pandemic would get “worse and worse and worse” if the basics weren’t followed.*Over 572,000 people have died from the virus worldwide.*Hong Kong also introduced a fine of $645 for anyone refusing to wear a mask on public transport in a fresh bid to prevent the resurgent coronavirus from spiraling out of control.*Japan’s government said a new state of emergency is possible if infections increase further.*US has the biggest COVID-19 testing programme in the world, better than big countries like Russia, China, India and Brazil, President Donald Trump said.
The number of COVID positive cases among the Maharashtra police force reached 6393 on Tuesday, of whom 82 cops have till now succumbed to the disease. Of the 6393, 5099 have till now recovered and 1212 remain active cases. The number of cases among the two-lakh strong force has risen by 680 over the last one week and 11 more deaths have been reported in the same period. With lockdown being imposed in many jurisdictions across the state, a major chunk of police force will be deployed on the ground for its enforcement.
Jammu and Kashmir BJP president and former Nowshera MLA, Ravinder Raina was on Tuesday tested Covid positive. Party sources said that his sample for COVID test was taken at the airport here on Monday after he returned to Jammu by air from Srinagar. Raina had gone to Kashmir following the killing of a senior BJP leader Wasim Bari, his father and younger brother by militants last week. Sources said that he had stayed in the Valley for nearly a week attending the deceased’s nimaz-e-Janaza. On Sunday also, he accompanied Union Minister Jitendra Singh and BJP National General Secretary Ram Madhav with party’s J&K incharge and sitting MP Avinash Rai Khanna to the residence of deceased party leader to offer their condolences.
In his briefing,ICMR DG Balram Bhargava confirmed that COVID-19 is a droplet infection and said, "there has been hypothesis & suggestions by several scientists that there may be some airborne transmission with microdroplets (less than 5 microns in size," he said adding that physical distancing & use of masks remains important.
The Health Ministry on Tuesday assured that there has been progressive decline in daily growth rate of new COVID-19 cases and that the total recovered cases of COVID-19 are about 1.8 times the number of active cases. It also said that eighty-six per cent of total active cases of COVID-19 are in 10 states, right now.
Addressing a presser,  The ICMR Chief Balram Bhargava said that  there are  2 Indian indigenous candidate vaccines. 'They have undergone successful toxicity studies in rats, mice and rabbits. Data was submitted to DCGI gollowing which both these got clearance to start early phase human trials early this month,' he said adding that these candidate have got their sites ready and they are doing their clinical study on approximately a 1000 human volunteers each at different sites.
Health ministry begin press briefing. 
The Bihar government on Tuesday announced complete lockdown in Bihar from July 16-31. The announcement was made by Deputy Chief Minister Sushil Kumar Modi.  The state on Tuesday recorded the worst single-day spike of 1,432 Covid-19 cases pushing the tally to 18,853, said the state health department. 
During a hearing on regulation of Covid-19 treatments at private hospitals, advocate Harish Salve claimed insurance companies were driving the paranoia as they didn't want to pay in full.
Plea to regulate Covid treatment costs in private corporate hospitals: Sr Adv Harish Salve tells Supreme Court that insurance companies are driving the paranoia of high Covid treatment costs because they don’t want to pay in full @IndianExpress



 A health workers takes the temperatures of policemen in Gujarat. (Express Photo: Jaipal Singh)
The Uttar Pradesh government decided to implement strict restrictions across the state on weekends to check the spread of coronavirus, joining Karnataka and Tamil Nadu which have been imposing Sunday lockdown.
Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Bihar were among the states that have already announced area-wise lockdown for different durations.
Karnataka government has now announced a complete lockdown in Bengaluru for seven days from July 14.
Tamil Nadu Chief Minister K Palaniswami extended the curbs in Madurai and nearby regions including the Paravai Town Panchayat and several village panchayats till July 14.
The Maharashtra government had earlier announced a comprehensive lockdown in Pune and Pimpri-Chinchwad from July 13-23. The state government had imposed similar curbs in areas around the state capital Mumbai.
