Coronavirus June 15 Highlights: India evacuates 156 nationals from Sri Lanka, second flight leaves from Cairo
As many as 156 Indian nationals stranded in Sri Lanka were flown back home on Monday under the third phase of Vande Bharat Mission. Over 1,000 Indians have been repatriated from Sri Lanka so far in various flights and the Indian Navy Ship INS Jalashwa since the first phase of the evacuation mission was launched on May 7, news agency PTI reported.
Meanwhile, Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami Monday announced a complete lockdown in Chennai, Thiruvallur, Chengalpet, and Kancheepuram districts from June 19 to June 30. However, grocery shops, hotels (only takeaways) and other shops selling essential items will remain open between 6 am and 2 pm during the lockdown.
With over 11,500 fresh cases reported in the last 24 hours, the COVID infections in India on Monday rose to 3.32 lakh. The death toll also crossed the 9,500-mak to stand at 9520 deaths. While nearly 1.7 lakh people have recovered, there are over 1.5 lakh active infections in the country. Maharashtra, the worst-affected state, has over 1 lakh cases, followed by Tamil Nadu and Delhi. India is the fourth country worst-hit by coronavirus, after the United States, Brazil, and Russia. Globally, over 7.9 million people have been infected with more than 4.3 lakh deaths.

Coronavirus (Covid-19) Tracker, India Lockdown News Updates: Over 3.32 lakh cases in India, 9520 deaths; Home Minister Amit Shah chairs an all-party meet in Delhi. Follow LIVE updates
The family of the first Covid-19 casualty of Surat police says no test was conducted on the deceased assistant sub-inspector (ASI) before he was discharged from hospital. ASI Magan Baraiya (55), died on June 14, three days after he was discharged from New Civil Hospital (NCH) in Surat. Read More
On a day when Covid-19 cases crossed 1,600 in Vadodara, settling at 1,610 with 44 new cases from 189 samples tested on Monday, the administration has begun scaling up the existing dedicated Covid-19 facilities at government hospitals in the city.
The SSG Hospital, run by the Vadodara Municipal Corporation (VMC), will turn into a 500-bed facility and Gujarat Medical Education and Research Society (GMERS)-run Gotri Medical college will add 120 more beds to its existing Covid-19 beds. Read more here
With more than 500 cases reported on the sixth consecutive day, the state tally crossed 24,000 on Monday. The state has added nearly 7,000 cases since June 1. To compare, the state had added nearly as many cases from March 19, when Gujarat reported its first case, to May 6, a time period most of which was spent in lockdown. More than 1,500 Covid-19 patients have died till date in the state. Read more here
Another flight under the Vande Bharat Mission took off from Cairo for Mumbai and Kochi with 235 passengers onboard including 3 infants: Embassy of India in Cairo, Egypt
Second #VandeBharatMission flight from Cairo took off for Mumbai (Maharashtra) and Cochin (Kerala) with 235 passengers including 3 infants on board: Embassy of India in Cairo, Egypt pic.twitter.com/6YHi1vJTNf
In the week ending June 14, Punjab recorded deaths of 15 Covid-19 patients. This was nearly double that of eight deaths that the state had witnessed the previous week (June 1-7). The death rate in the two consecutive weeks remained unusually high for state that reported its first novel coronovirus positive case on March 9, and the first death from the disease 10 days later on March 19. Read more here
At 40 deaths due to Covid-19, close to 3,600 positive cases and over 8,000 personnel in quarantine at present, the Maharashtra police force is increasingly facing the problem of multiple units being partly or entirely quarantined. Whenever a cop tests positive for the novel coronavirus, the responsibilities of the affected unit is handed over to other units. Read more here
With face masks becoming part of the new normal across the world, Masks d’Art, an online charitable initiative, has attempted to raise funds for the fight against the coronavirus pandemic by capitalising on the artistic potential of masks.
The initiative organised an online exhibition of face masks featuring 50 artists across India. The masks were sourced from a women’s self-help group and couriered to artists across the country. Read more here
The daily health bulletin released by the Karnataka Department of Health and Family Welfare Services on Monday showed a sudden jump in the number of patients admitted to Intensive Care Units (ICUs) in the designated COVID hospitals across the state. While the number was 16 Sunday, the same rose to 56 on Monday, adding 40 more to the list. Click here to read our Karnataka Covid-19 wrap.

The total number of containment zones in Bengaluru rises to 191 with 35 new cases.
Active cases in the city: 362Total positive cases: 725Recovered cases: 329Death: 33
The list of containment zones in #Bengaluru now rises to 191 with 35 new cases. Active cases in the city: 362Total positive cases: 725Recovered cases: 329Death: 33@IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/LyP5J6YgPT
In view of the increasing numbers of cases among the returnees from Chennai and Delhi, the Karnataka Government on Monday revised its policy of quarantining interstate travellers by imposing a three-day institutional quarantine for those coming in from those two states followed by 11 days of home isolation.
Karnataka Chief Minister B S Yediyurappa announced the decision after a meeting on Covid-19 with ministers and officials. The state had earlier announced a seven-day institutional quarantine for those returning from Maharashtra. However, there was no mandatory institutional quarantine for asymptomatic people returning to Karnataka from other states. More details here.

From an Indore groom fined for not wearing a mask to rise in cycle sales in Kolkata, here's a curated list of some interesting stories as the country enters Day 8 of 'Unlock 1.0'.

As many as 156 Indian nationals stranded in Sri Lanka were flown back home on Monday under the third phase of Vande Bharat Mission. Over 1,000 Indians have been repatriated from Sri Lanka so far in various flights and the Indian Navy Ship INS Jalashwa since the first phase of the evacuation mission was launched on May 7, news agency PTI reported.
Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami Monday announced complete lockdown in four districts – Chennai, Chengalpet, Kancheepuram and Thiruvallur – from June 19 to June 30 following a surge in Covid-19 cases. The decision was taken by the Tamil Nadu Chief Minister after he chaired a review meeting with the expert committee of health professionals constituted by the government as well as with the Tamil Nadu Health Department officials and other ministers. Click here to know what’s allowed, what’s not
Here's what all happened today:
*Over 11,500 fresh cases reported in last 24 hrs; death toll at 9,520
*Complete lockdown in four Tamil Nadu districts, including Chennai
*ICMR recommends use of rapid antigen kits for testing in containment zones
*Kerala allows people to undertake short visits without mandatory quarantine
*Delhi to test more at lower cost in coming week, says Kejriwal
*Airlines can take bookings for middle seats, rules Bombay HC
*Have to increase Covid-19 testing in Delhi using new solutions, says Amit Shah at all-party meet*Kerala allows people to undertake short visits without mandatory quarantine. Here are the guidelines
*For workplaces ready to reopen, IISc has an online self-assessment tool*No plan to impose lockdown again in Gujarat, says CM Vijay Rupani
Two banquet halls in Delhi's Peeragarhi have been turned into quarantine facilities by the government in view of rise in Covid-19 cases.
Delhi: Two banquet halls in Peeragarhi have been turned into quarantine facilities by the government in view of rise in #COVID19 cases. pic.twitter.com/98LRWNbJid
The Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC) on Monday decided to start its first inter-state operation in a phased manner with services to Andhra Pradesh from June 17.
Almost a month after resuming the inter-district services, the transport corporation said it would run the buses without air-conditioners in view of the COVID-19 spread. (PTI)
Ministry of Civil Aviation allows Maharashtra to operate 100 flights daily. Earlier, Maharashtra was allowed only 50 flights (25 arrivals and 25 departures) daily.
The CBI has issued alerts to all State/UT Police agencies based on the inputs received from Interpol relating to Covid 19 related scams such as online advance payment scam and use of methanol for counterfeiting hand sanitizers. In online advance payment scam, the accused are defrauding customers online by taking advance payments for supplying PPE and other protective gear. The CBI has also recieved information from the Interpol on use of methanol, a toxic chemical, for preparing spurious hand sanitizers.
The CBI has issued alerts to all State/UT Police agencies based on the inputs received from Interpol relating to Covid 19 related scams such as online advance payment scam and use of methanol for counterfeiting hand sanitizers. @IndianExpress
Amid the coronavirus pandemic, the plight of those in the lowest rung of the world’s largest film industry moved those at the very top, and soon stars from across small and big screen were doing their bit to help everyone affected, from hairdressers to background dancers, make-up artistes and light men. READ HERE
The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has recommended the use of rapid antigen test kits for diagnosis of COVID-19 in containment zones and healthcare settings in combination with the RT-PCR test. The kits will allow faster diagnosis without laboratory examination.
 Migrants getting their temperature checked in Pune. (Express Photo by Arul Horizon)
The peak stage of Covid-19 in India may arrive around mid-November during which there could be a paucity of isolation and ICU beds, and ventilators, according to a study. The study conducted by researchers from an Operations Research Group constituted by the ICMR also said the implementation of eight-week lockdown along with strengthened public health measures delayed the peak of the pandemic by an estimated 34 to 76 days and helped bring down the number of infections by 69 to 97 per cent. This allowed time for the healthcare system to shore up resources and infrastructure.
Apart from Shah, LG Anil Baijal and Kejriwal, those who attended the meeting include Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia, Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan, members of the State Disaster Management Authority and senior officers from the Home and Health ministries. The home minister has also called a separate meeting in the evening with the mayors of Delhi's three municipal corporations -- North, South and East -- and commissioners of the civic bodies to discuss the coronavirus situation in the capital.
In the beginning of May, when the country was entering the third phase of the lockdown, the colour-coded classification set by the central government put almost all of Northeast entirely in the green zone, reflecting only a handful of reported cases: 43 in Assam, 12 in Meghalaya, 2 in Manipur, 2 in Tripura, 1 in Mizoram, 1 in Arunachal Pradesh and none in Nagaland.
Cut to June, the region accounts for more than 5,000 cases — with Assam taking the lead, followed by Tripura, with Manipur not far behind. A significant chunk of this surge can be traced entirely to returnees, or those who have come back to their home states after the opening up of inter-state borders on May 17. While Assam has reported cases since April 1 and is now the most affected state with its current tally at 3,693 (2,098 active), the other states, too, are witnessing a considerable rise every day.
Kerala has decided to allow some exemptions in its complete clampdown on Sundays, in view of the relaxations been provided since Monday. The exemptions will apply only in non-containment zones. With places of worship reopening partly since June 9, devotees moving to or back from such places are exempt from the Sunday shutdown.
The Maharashtra government has approved the use of homeopathy medicine “Arsenic Album 30” for the general population as a prophylactic and an immunity booster against the disease. Apart from this, the state government has also set up a task force and has come up with a list of Unani and Ayurvedic medicines like Agastya Haritaki, Ayush 64 as well as sesame oil, as measures against Covid-19.
