Coronavirus May 16 Highlights: Centre launches online dashboard to monitor info on migrants’ movement
Coronavirus (Covid-19) Tracker India Updates: The Centre has launched an online dashboard to monitor and facilitate the smooth movement of migrant workers and their contact-tracing during lockdown across the country. In a communication to all states and union territories, Home Secretary Ajay Bhalla said the central government has already allowed the movement of migrant workers by buses and Shramik Special trains to enable them to travel to their native places.
Follow Nirmala Sitharaman Press Conference Live Updates
With India crossing the coronavirus tally of China, signs of a second wave have cropped up in the country. States like Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa had either stopped reporting new cases, or were reporting very few. In the last couple of days, however, there has been a noticeable rise in these states. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on Friday put out the fresh number of coronavirus cases in the country. The cases have crossed the 85,000-mark, settling at 85,940. At least 30,152 have been cured from the virus infection. The death toll is at 2,752, with the highest deaths reported from Maharashtra (1068).

In every 3 minutes, a Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation (GSRTC) bus leave Surat city to drop people stranded here due to the Covid-19 lockdown to north Gujarat and Saurashtra. With the daily departure of around 1,000 buses, a total of 1.66 lakh people from Surat had been dropped to different destinations in Gujarat. As many as 5,512 buses had left Surat since May 6.
The state transport department charges only one way fare from the passengers and only 30 people are allowed to travel in the 51-seater bus. Read more here
Maharashtra reported 67 deaths due to coronavirus disease (Covid-19) on Saturday, of which 41 deaths were recorded in Mumbai, according to data from the state Health department.
A total of 1,606 new Covid-19 cases were reported from across the state on Saturday. The state tally of COVID-19 positive patients is now 30,706 and the toll has gone up to 1,135. Read more here
Pune reported as many as 11 deaths due to coornavirus disease (Covid-19) and the highest single-day spike in cases so far, 228, on Saturday. The toll due to Covid-19 rose to 197, while the total number of patients has gone up to 3,795.
District Collector Naval Kishore Ram told The Indian Express that the administration was planning another audit to review the cases. “We are also puzzled. On some days, there is a spike in the number of deaths of critical patients… The earlier review showed that in some cases there was a delay in hospitalisation of patients but in other cases, they found that despite more than 15-20 days of treatment, the patients succumbed to the infection,” said the district collector. He pointed out that several patients with co-morbidities have also recovered and been discharged. Read more here
Gujarat Chief Minister Vijay Rupani held a meeting with industry associations and trade bodies and sought their suggestions and opinions regarding the measures to be taken while implementing lockdown 4.0.
“The meeting was held on Friday evening with various chambers, textile associations, diamond associations, retail and wholesale traders of eight municipal corporations. In the meeting held through a video conference, everyone’s suggestions were invited,” said Ashwani Kumar, Secretary to the CM, on Saturday. The official said several “good suggestions” were received during the meeting. Deputy Chief Minister Nitin Patel was also present in the meeting. Read more here
To tide over the disruption in studies owing to the lockdown, the Kerala education department has decided to take classes to the homes of about 45 lakh school students from June 1. A recent survey by the department found 94 per cent of students in state board schools have access to Internet or TV at home. The survey covered students up to Class XII who are enrolled in state board schools.
Beginning May 18, Punjab will lift the curfew but will continue with the lockdown till May 31 with maximum possible relaxations, Chief Minister Amarinder Singh Saturday said.
“From May 18, there will be no curfew in the state. But the lockdown will be there till May 31. Most of the shops and businesses will be allowed to open. We will give more relaxations. Select public transport will also start plying on roads from Monday onwards,” Amarinder said in a live Facebook interaction as part of his #AskCaptain initiative. Read more here
The number of Covid-19 cases at BDD chawls in Worli and NM Joshi Marg of Lower Parel have risen threefold in the last one week. After the number of cases gradually dipped in Worli Koliwada and Jijamata Nagar, the increase in numbers at BDD chawls poses another challenge for G-South ward comprising Worli, Lower Parel and Mahalaxmi. This ward is in the Assembly constituency of state Tourism Minister Aaditya Thackeray.
As on May 14, BDD chawls have 227 positive cases. With the rising number of cases, the BMC has now shut all shops, including those selling essential goods, till Sunday to restrict movement completely. Read more here
Contact tracing is becoming a challenging task for civic staff with close to 1,000 new Covid-19 cases each day in Mumbai. The process is getting delayed as, in some cases, it takes at least two to three days, after a suspected patient tests positive, to put people under quarantine or explain home quarantine rules to them. This poses a higher risk of wider transmission of the infection.
In one such case, a 67-year-old Bandra resident died after suffering from breathlessness and high creatinine levels on May 13. Since his Covid-19 test reports were pending, the private hospital did not seal the body and directly handed it over to the family, which kept his body in a coffin full of ice overnight in their chawl room. The next day, eight people buried him in a nearby cemetery. His samples tested positive two days later, on May 15. But it was only on Saturday that a civic official visited the chawl.  Read more here
Following instructions from the state government, the BBMP has decided to do a health screening for all residents of Bengaluru. For this, BBMP will be setting up 3,000 block teams which will be visiting every household, BBMP Commissioner B H Anil Kumar said.
#COVID19 #Bengaluru: Over 3,000 BBMP teams to do door-to-door surveys to collect health-related details of citizens, especially those with co-morbidity conditions. "Already, our teams have visited over 13 lakh homes," BBMP Commissioner confirms. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/rmHIeyy8tF
Amid increased influx of people returning home in Jammu and Kashmir from different parts of the country, the Union Territory on Saturday reported the highest 108 COVID-19 positive cases in 24 hours. Kashmir reported one COVID related death too. With this, the death toll among COVID positive people in UT so far has risen to 12.
"108 new cases today. No room for complacency. Be alert. Follow guidelines,’’ tweeted Principal Secretary Power Development Department and UT government spokesperson, Rohit Kansal.  The highest number of 12 positive cases were reported in Ramban district bordering Kashmir Valley, followed by 10 in Kathua adjoining Punjab. About those tested positive in Kathua, Deputy Commissioner O P Bhagat tweeted: ``All had travel history outside the UT and they were already in quarantine’’.
Similarly, ten people tested positive in Ramban district too had returned to the UT from outside and they were also already under quarantine, said Director of National Health Mission Bhupinder Kumar. The other two had returned from Kashmir and were at home in Banihal tehsil, he added. - Arun Sharma reports from Jammu
Goa now has 13 cases of Covid-19 positives as of Saturday evening, confirmed Health Minister Vishwajit Rane. The second wave of patients began on May 13 when seven persons tested positive, including a one year old, having returned from Sholapur, Mumbai and Gujarat. ON May 14, a sea farer returning via Mumbai tested positive. All the eight underwent tests after having officially crossed the border with proper travel permits and were admitted to ESI hospital. “Another three tested on Friday and they have been shifted to ESI too,” Rane added. The three were from a group of seven men who had visited Gangapur, Kolkata to deliver barges via sea and returned to Goa via road, and tested at Mollem Check Post upon arrival. The other four of the seven tested negative and have been sent to institutional quarantine.
On Saturday, two more positive cases showed up. “A driver has tested positive today and he has traveled to Goa from Haridwar. He was working for an industry in Goa,” said Rane. “One more person who was brought to Goa under a GSIA permit has tested positive and we are sending him to ESI hospital. He was under quarantine as per procedure but was feeling unwell. ” Goa has been in the green zone since May 1, with the last case on April 3. With the roads and railways now eased for travel, Goa is expecting a new influx of passengers — both of Goans returning home and those working in industries here. -Smita Nair reports from Goa
Centre launches online dashboard to monitor info on migrants' movement. National Migrant Info System (NMIS) is a central online repository on #MigrantWorkers developed by NDMA to facilitate their seamless movement across states. MHA asked the states to upload data on NMIS Dashboard for better coordination, movement monitoring and contact tracing.
National Migrant Info System (NMIS) - a central online repository on #MigrantWorkers - developed by @ndmaindia to facilitate their seamless movement across StatesMHA to States: Upload data on NMIS Dashboard for better coordination, movement monitoring & contact tracing#COVID19 pic.twitter.com/M6oYQIFtZ3
Following a request by the state government, churches in Mizoram have agreed for their premises to be used as quarantine facilities during the COVID-19 pandemic.“This pertains to most church halls available with the bigger churches,” said state Chief Secretary Lalnunmawia Chuaungo, adding that the decision was taken keeping in mind the large number of residents coming back to the state.“Since May 4, around 2,000 people have returned, and we are expecting another 10,000 to return in the next few weeks.” On Friday, 833 passengers de-boarded at Mizoram from a special ‘shramik’ train from Chennai. As per rules, all those incoming will need to undergo institutional quarantine for 14 days. - A report by Tora Agarwala
(Twitter @ZoramthangaCM)
Manipur confirmed three more cases of COVID-19 on Saturday taking the total number of positive case in the state to six and four active cases. The new confirmed cases of COVID-19 were reported even as the evacuation of stranded Manipuris was underway. All three new COVID-19 patients were inmates of different quarantine centres situated in Imphal who returned to the state just recentlyManipur health department said, of the three samples sent for testing, the sample of a nursing professional who has returned from Kolkata had tested positive for the virus on Friday. Her sample was tested at JNIMS COVID-19 testing labs. The 21-year-old nurse from Kamjong district has been evacuated to the Isolation ward of JNIMS from the quarantine centre she was staying.On Saturday, two more samples, a 75-year-old woman and his son (48) were tested positive for the virus. The samples were tested at the laboratory of Regional Institute of Medical Sciences.
Another 20 year old girl from Churachandpur district of Manipur tested positive for COVID-19 on Saturday. The patient returned to Manipur on Wednesday in a special carrying over 1000 Manipuris stranded at Chennai. She has been moved to JNIMS Isolation ward in Imphal: source Chief Medical Officer Churachandpur district hospital.(RIMS). They are residents of Moreh border town, Tengnoupal district. - Jimmy Leivon reports from Manipur
Hours after Finance Minister Niramala Sitharaman announced structural reforms as part of Covid economic measures, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said these will create many busiess opportunities. Taking to Twitter PM Modi wrote, "Important sectors such as coal, minerals, defence, aviation, space and atomic energy have been covered in the announcements by the FM today. The measures and reforms announced will create many business opportunities and contribute to economic transformation."
Important sectors such as coal, minerals, defence, aviation, space and atomic energy have been covered in the announcements by the FM today. The measures and reforms announced will create many business opportunities and contribute to economic transformation.
Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Saturday thanked Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharamam for the "landmark" reform initiatives in defence, aviation, coal and some other sectors, saying these were unprecedented steps to make India self-reliant.In a series of tweets, Shah said the prime minister's 'mantra' of 'reform, perform and transform' is the key of India's phenomenal growth in the last six years. "I thank PM @narendramodi & FM @nsitharaman for today's landmark decisions which will surely boost our economy and further our efforts towards Atmanirbhar Bharat," he said.
PM Modi‘s mantra of Reform, Perform & Transform is the key of India’s phenomenal growth in the last 6 years.I thank PM @narendramodi & FM @nsitharaman for today’s landmark decisions which will surely boost our economy & further our efforts towards Atmanirbhar Bharat.
The UK government on Saturday launched trials for specially-trained 'Covid dogs' that may be able to detect coronavirus in humans, even before symptoms appear, as part of a new research. The trials will establish whether these dogs could be used as a potential new non-invasive, early warning measure to detect coronavirus in the future.
Researchers at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) will carry out the first phase of a trial in collaboration with the charity Medical Detection Dogs and Durham University, backed by 500,000 pounds of government funding, the Department of Health and Social Care said. The aim of the first phase will be to determine whether dogs are able to detect coronavirus in humans from odour samples. (PTI)
Health Minister K K Shailaja has informed that 11 new cases of Covid-19 were reported in Kerala today. Four persons in Thrissur district, three from Kozhikode district, and two each from Palakkad and Malappuram districts are those who have been confirmed with the infection. Seven of them have returned from abroad and two each have come back from Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra. At the same time, four patients under treatment for Coronavirus infection have recovered today. Two patients each from Wayanad and Kannur districts are those who tested negative. This includes an 81-year-old who was in critical condition at the Government Medical College Hospital in Kannur. He was hospitalised for 42 days and he was tested 16 times during this period, The Health Minister has congratulated the entire team there for his successful recovery. The total number of recovered cases in the State is 497 and 87 patients are presently under treatment in different hospitals. Till now 55,045 persons have arrived in Kerala - 2,911 by air, 793 by sea, 1,021 by rail and 50,320 by road. 
The UT Government has approached the Centre with the request to bring back J&K residents stranded in Oman, Dubai and Iran under its 'Vande Bharat Mission’.In a letter to Foreign Secretary Harsh Vardhan Shringla, UT Chief Secretary B V R Subrahmanyam has sought his personal intervention in prioritising the evacuation of residents of Jammu and Kashmir stranded in these three countries. The CS in his letter informed the Foreign Secretary that the evacuation of the students from Bangladesh as part of the 'Vande Bharat Mission’ is being greatly appreciated by the people of Jammu and Kashmir.“The Government of Jammu and Kashmir has also received requests from its residents stranded in Oman, Dubai and Iran for their early evacuation. Their prolonged stay abroad during the COVID-19 Pandemic has made them restless and fearful of catching the disease in a foreign country. They are also desirous of celebrating 'Eid' festival, which is, approaching on 25th May, 2020 in Jammu and Kashmir,” CS wrote to the Foreign Secretary and requested for his personal intervention in bringing the J&K residents back from these countries.
A report by Arun Sharma from Jammu
US President Donald Trump has said he does not want to talk to his Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping right now, expressing his displeasure at Beijing's handling of the coronavirus outbreak which has spread across the world, killing over 300,000 people.
The US has expressed disappointment over China's handling of the COVID-19 pandemic which has claimed 87,530 lives in America. President Trump on Thursday threatened to "cut off the whole relationship" with China.
The president has been pressing China to agree for an inquiry into the origin of the virus, including the allegation that it emerged from a lab in Wuhan. "Just don't want to talk to him right now. We will see what happens over the next little while," Trump told reporters at the White House on Friday, when asked why he did not want to not speak to Xi.
 US President Donald Trump has said he "stands with India and Prime Minister Narendra Modi during this pandemic".(Source: White House)
Coronavirus (Covid-19) Tracker India Live Updates: A total of 15 Railway Ministry officials have been placed in 14-day quarantine after a langoor handler in Rail Bhawan tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday. The names of the quarantined officials have been circulated internally for awareness. The man, who brought the langoor inside the ministry premises to scare the monkeys away as a matter of government policy, had been coming to the ministry till May 4, a discovery by senior ministry officials have found.
Meanwhile, US President Donald Trump said the US will donate ventilators to India to help it fight the pandemic in the country. Taking to Twitter, Trump said the country will donate ventilators to “our friends in India” as it “stands with India and Prime Minister Narendra Modi during this pandemic.” The US is also cooperating with India on vaccine development, he said, adding “Together we will beat the invisible enemy!”
Last month, Trump had warned India of retaliation if it does not supply the essential hydroxychloroquine drug to the US to treat COVID-19. India had subsequently revoked the export ban on HCQ and sent 29 million of the drug to the US.
Trump had then thanked PM Modi for his “strong leadership in helping not just India, but humanity” in the fight against the new coronavirus.” He had further thanked India “and the Indian people for the decision on HCQ,” adding that it “will not be forgotten.”
 Indians stranded in Singapore aboard a Singapore-Delhi Air India flight. (Twitter/India in Singapore)
Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday thanked US President Donald Trump for his decision of donating ventilators to India and said that this step gives more power to the friendship between India and US. "Thank you @POTUS @realDonaldTrump. This pandemic is being fought collectively by all of us. In such times, it’s always important for nations to work together and do as much as possible to make our world healthier and free from COVID-19. More power to India - United States friendship!" PM Modi tweeted.
The central government, meanwhile, is expected to take a call sometime over the next one week on when to resume flight operations. To this extent, the Ministry of Civil Aviation has already reached out to various stakeholders including airlines, airports and ground-handling firms to begin laying the ground for restarting flights.
When will the flights start?
The government is learnt to have told airlines that the carriers and the customers will be given time of 10 days to make commercial and technical preparations before the green signal to restart flights is given. Consequently, senior officials in the government and airlines expect commercial scheduled flights to resume sometime during the next one month.
