India COVID-19 latest updates, April 19: Cases cross 16,000 mark; no cut in pension for Central govt employees
Coronavirus India Updates: The Covid-19 tally in India crossed the 16,000-mark on Sunday to stand at 16,116, after 1,334 fresh cases were reported, the Ministry of Health said. The figure includes 519 deaths. As many as 2,231 COVID-19 patients, which is around 14.19 per cent, have been cured.
Meanwhile, the government banned e-commerce companies from delivering non-essential items during the ongoing lockdown, four days after allowing such firms to sell mobile phones, refrigerators and ready-made garments. They will, however, be allowed to continue supplying essentials.
Here is a look at the latest Covid-19 updates from across the country:
A day before its guidelines on phase two of the Covid-19 lockdown come into effect, the Centre on Sunday banned e-commerce companies from delivering non-essential items. They will, however, be allowed to continue supplying essentials.
The Home Ministry said the decision to allow non-essential goods through e-commerce was withdrawn after it was felt that the list of goods was extensive and may impact the curbs imposed to fight COVID-19.
“As you realise, some restrictions are necessary in our campaign against coronavirus. When the list of non-essential goods and overall situation was reviewed, it was felt that the list was pretty extensive. If we permit all goods, it may impact lockdown. Accordingly, the decision was reviewed,” MHA Joint Secretary Punya Salila Srivastava said.
The Finance Ministry on Sunday clarified that there would be no cut in pensions for Central government employees. The clarification comes amid rumours that the government was contemplating reduction or stoppage of pension. There are 65.26 lakh central government pensioners.
It is being reported that a 20% cut in Central Government Pensions is being planned.This news is FALSE. There will be no cut in pension disbursements. It is clarified that salaries and pensions will not be affected by Government Cash Management instructions.
— Ministry of Finance 🇮🇳 #StayHome #StaySafe (@FinMinIndia) April 19, 2020
“It is being reported that a 20 per cent cut in central government pensions is being planned. This news is false. There will be no cut in pension disbursements. It is clarified that salaries and pensions will not be affected by government cash management instructions,” the ministry said in a tweet.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday said the coronavirus outbreak had significantly changed the contours of professional life and these days home is the new office and internet is the new meeting room.
“I have also been adapting to these changes. Most meetings, be it with ministerial colleagues, officials and world leaders, are now via video conferencing,” Modi wrote on LinkedIn.
The need of the hour is to think of business and lifestyle models that are easily adaptable, the PM said. “Doing so, would mean that even in a time of crisis, our offices, businesses and commerce could get moving faster, ensuring loss of life does not occur,” he said.
Today, the world is in pursuit of new business models, PM Modi said, adding that India, a youthful nation known for its innovative zeal, can take the lead in providing a new work culture.
At least two doctors and six nurses at the Lady Hardinge Medical College in the national capital tested positive for coronavirus, PTI reported on Sunday. All the medical professionals were deployed at the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit of the hospital.
The hospital has begun tracing of the primary contacts of the medical professionals. According to a doctor, a 10-month-old baby who was recently brought to the emergency department with respiratory problems had tested positive for coronavirus. Now, the entire Pediatric ICU is being sanitised, the doctor said.
A railway trackman was infected with coronavirus in Jharkhand’s Dhanbad district, taking the total count in the state to 34, an official told PTI on Sunday. The total number of confirmed cases in the state includes two deaths, one each in Ranchi and Bokaro districts, he added.
The sample of the man, who is working with the East Central Railways, tested positive on Saturday, Dhanbad Deputy Commissioner Amit Kumar said.
Ranchi has registered the highest number of cases (18) in the state, followed by nine in Bokaro district, two each in Hazaribagh and Dhanbad and one each in Simdega, Koderma and Giridih districts.
A 41-year-old police inspector and a 70-year-old woman died due the novel coronavirus in Indore, taking the death toll in the Madhya Pradesh district to 49, PTI reported. This is the first case of a police officer dying of Covid-19 in the state, officials said.
“The police officer died at a private hospital late Saturday night. He was struggling with the disease since hospitalisation about 20 days back,” Superintendent of Police Maheshchandra Jain told the news agency.
The district, one of the worst affected in the country, has so far reported 890 cases, according to official figures.
A man who had recovered from the novel coronavirus was again found to be suffering from the infection in Himachal Pradesh, officials said. The man, who is a Tablighi Jamaat member, tested positive for the infection on Saturday within a week of his two reports coming out negative, officials added.
Residents of different places in Mandi district, the man along with two other Tablighi Jamaat members had been staying at a mosque in Nakroh village in Una’a Amb tehsil and all of them tested positive on April 2. They were admitted to Tanda’s Dr. Rajendra Prasad Government Medical College (RPGMC) in Kangra district on April 3.
According to officials, the trio had tested negative for the first time on April 10 and was declared as cured as per protocol after they tested negative for the second time on April 12. Subsequently, they were been discharged from the RPGMC and were kept in institutional quarantine. However, with the man testing positive again, the total number of active cases in the hill state has increased to 23 out of the total 40 positive cases.
Tamil Nadu has registered a dip in the number of fresh cases during last week and is now optimistic of flattening the curve in the coming days.
According to PTI, the recent daily figures have showed a decline or marginal increase of the virus that has claimed 15 lives in the state so far. “The last three days saw a decline in the number of COVID-19 positive cases, indicating our efforts in monitoring and effective monitoring at that, appropriate prevention measures and containment plans are beginning to pay results,” Health Minister C Vijaya Baskar said on Saturday.
More than a month after the first positive case of Covid-19 surfaced in Jammu and Kashmir, the Union Territory received its first batch of rapid testing kits on Saturday. Dispatched by the Centre, of the total 12,000 kits, 9,000 have been earmarked for Kashmir and 3,000 for the Jammu region.
Until now, testing was limited to high-risk contacts of the identified positive cases. However, “the rapid test kits will help expand testing in areas designated as red zones,” Financial Commissioner, Health and Medical Education, Atal Dulloo told The Indian Express.
Don’t miss these articles on Coronavirus from the Explained section:
? How coronavirus attacks, step by step
? Mask or no mask? Why the guidance has been shifting
? Besides a face cover, should I wear gloves when I go outdoors?
? How the Agra, Bhilwara and Pathanamthitta Covid-19 containment models differ
? Can coronavirus damage your brain?
