Coronavirus India highlights: In Delhi, 44% decline in Covid deaths in early July compared to early June
Delhi has recorded a 44 per cent decline in the number of Covid deaths in early July as compared to early June, the Delhi government said Sunday. The city recorded 605 deaths due to the disease between July 1 and 12 while 1,089 fatalities were recorded during the same period in June, according to an analysis carried out by the Health Department.
Sikkim government on Sunday extended its lockdown till August 1. Earlier in the day, the state also reported its first Covid-19 death — a 74-year-old with comorbidities from East Sikkim. “A 74-year-old male from Rongli, East Sikkim passed away this morning, in the Covid-19 wing of STNM hospital. He had comorbidities & was suffering from hypertension & diabetes,” said a tweet from the official account of the Sikkim government’s Information & Public Relations Department.
With daily coronavirus cases (48,661) coming close to 50,000 for the third consecutive day, the total number of coronavirus infections in India rose to 13,85,522 on Sunday. The toll rose to 32,063 with 705 deaths in the last 24 hours. Currently, India has over 4.6 lakh active cases, while 8.8 lakh people have recovered. More high-risk areas were brought under lockdown on Saturday for varying periods, including weekends, by states in a bid to check the rapid rise in COVID-19 cases in India.
Globally, nearly 16 million people have been infected and 6.4 lakh people have succumbed to the virus. North Korean leader Kim Jong Un placed the city of Kaesong near the border with South Korea under total lockdown after a person was found with suspected COVID-19 symptoms, saying he believes “the vicious virus” may have entered the country, state media reported Sunday.

PGIMER has ordered ICMR-validated rapid antigen test kits made by Indo-European company S D Biosensor to check their efficacy and sensitivity on non-COVID patients such as patients scheduled for surgery at the hospital or patients admitted to other departments or visiting for an OPD consultation in the future. Read More
A 65-year-old man from Sector-38 died of Covid-19 at the civil hospital in Sector 48, which was recently opened up for Covid-19 patients. The hospital had only two patients as of Friday. Read More
Twenty-two people were arrested and owners of more than 2,000 vehicles penalised across Noida and Greater Noida on Sunday for allegedly violating curbs imposed due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Gautam Buddh Nagar police said.
Also, 11 vehicles were impounded for similar violation during a 24-hour period till Sunday night in Gautam Buddh Nagar as restrictions continued in the district, like the rest of places in Uttar Pradesh, due to lockdown-like curbs imposed on weekends. The restrictions have been imposed as part of the state government's concerted efforts for screening and testing people for COVID-19 and to check the spread of other vector-borne diseases. PTI
Eid-ul-Adha will be a low-key affair in Pune this year with the state government’s guidelines to avoid festivities, and with most localities in the city being in containment zones. Financial constraints brought about by the lockdown have also limited a large section of the community from buying sacrificial animals. Eid-ul-Adha, popularly called Bakrid in South Asia, is one of the two major annual festivals of Muslims — the other being Eid-ul-Fitr.
Two more coronavirus patients died in Tripura on Sunday, raising the state's COVID-19 casualty to 13. Chief Minister Biplab Kumar Deb tweeted: "Unfortunately 2 ( West 1, Gomati 1) COVID-19 POSITIVE patients died today." Earlier, 11 more people including a 72 year old woman were claimed by the COVID pandemic in the state. Kin of those who died of COVID-19 are given Rs10 lakh compensation by the state government as per a previously announced package for corona fatalities.
Meanwhile, the state detected 37 more COVID-19 cases on Sunday, raising the state's total corona tally to 3,919. However, 2210 of them have recovered and were discharged from hospital. 'Alert! 37 People found COVID-19 POSITIVE out of 2567 ( RT-PCR Test 882 all Negative and Antigen Test 1685 found 37 Positive ) samples tested,' CM Deb wrote in his tweet.
📌Alert ~ 3️⃣7️⃣ People found COVID-19 POSITIVE out of 2567 ( RT-PCR Test 882 all Negative and Antigen Test 1685 found 37 Positive ) samples tested. Unfortunately 2️⃣ ( West 1, Gomati 1) COVID-19 POSITIVE patients died today.#Tripuracovid19count
The national capital has recorded a 44 per cent decline in the number of COVID-19 deaths in early July as compared to early June, the Delhi government said on Sunday. The city recorded 605 deaths due to the viral disease between July 1 and 12 as against 1,089 fatalities during the same period in June, according to an analysis carried out by the Health Department.


An eight-day total lockdown began in Dimapur, the commercial hub of Nagaland, from Sunday to stem the spread of COVID-19, district task force officials said. Out of the 1,339 coronavirus positive cases in the State, Dimapur district with 527 has the highest number of people infected by the virus followed by Kohima with 334 confirmed cases, health officials said. The Kohima district administration had already announced a seven-day lockdown starting from July 25 in the state capital. Dimapur wore a deserted look with streets empty and shops closed. (PTI)
Vadodara's Covid-19 tally now 4,194 with 92 new cases from 617 samples.
Vadodara #Covid19 tally at 4194 with 92 cases from 617 samplesEast 18West 20North 19South 13Rural 22Discharged 30 (Total 3263)Deaths -3 (Total toll 77)@IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/SgGqjh8NV0
Puducherry Chief Minister V Narayanasamy, his cabinet colleagues, the territorial Assembly Speaker V P Sivakolundhu and all the legislators would undergo COVID-19 test after an AINRC MLA who attended the budget session tested positive for the virus. The tests would be done for all 32 MLAs on Monday and Tuesday at the assembly premises and the nearby Health Department office, a spokesman of the Assembly Secretariat told PTI on Sunday.
This has become necessary after an opposition AINRC legislator N S J Jayabal had tested positive on Saturday and was admitted to a private hospital, the spokesman said adding a watch and ward staff had also tested positive and was admitted to the government medical college hospital  Saturday. (PTI)
Delhi's recovery rate among corona patients reached nearly 88 per cent on Sunday, with CM Arvind Kejriwal saying the national capital is now at the 10th rank among the states and union territories as the number of active cases are "steadily" declining. The number of active cases is 11,904 now, against 12,657 on Saturday, 13,681 on Friday, 14,554 on Thursday and 14,954 on Wednesday, according to health department bulletins. The recovery rate in Delhi has climbed to 87.95 per cent from Saturday's figure of 87.29 per cent, while the positivity rate rose to 6.13 per cent from 5.56 per cent on Saturday, the department said in its latest bulletin. 
A bar body has urged the central and state governments to provide financial assistance to lawyers considering their loss of income due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The bar body also urged the central government to direct nationalised banks to provide loans to lawyers at a concessional rate of interest. "The central government shall allot and transfer sufficient amount to the Bar Council of India for providing financial assistance to the needy lawyers. Those state governments which have not provided any money to state bar councils till today for the financial assistance of lawyers should immediately disburse sufficient amount to the respective bar councils," Akhil Bharatiya Adhivakta Parishad (ABAP) said in a resolution. (PTI)
Karnataka Forest Minister Anand Singh has tested positive for COVID-19, sources close to him said on Sunday. Anand Singh, whose swab was collected on Friday, was found infected with the coronavirus on Saturday night. However, he is asymptomatic, his close aides told PTI. "He has been tested positive but he is asymptomatic and is quarantined," his confidante said requesting anonymity. He also said that a few days ago, the minister's driver tested positive. (PTI)
Civil Aviation Min Hardeep Singh Puri Sunday said 814,000 stranded Indians have returned through various means under Vande Bharat Mission since 6 May 2020, of which more than 270,000 returned on flights from 53 countries. "Now we prepare to dovetail Phase-4 of #VandeBharatMission into Phase-5 from 1 Aug," he added.
More than 814K stranded Indians have returned through various means under VBM since 6 May 2020, out of which more than 270K returned on flights from 53 countries. Now we prepare to dovetail Phase-4 of VBM into Phase-5 from 1st August 2020 & bring back more Indian citizens.



The Mayor of Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC), Bonthu Rammohan, Sunday said he had tested positive for the novel coronavirus, and was under self-isolation. He said he has no symptoms. The Mayor and his family members undertook rapid antigen tests the previous day, and all his family members have tested negative. In a home video shared with the media, the Mayor appealed to people to stay safe and take all necessary precautions. He asked all those who have been infected with the virus to “stay strong mentally” to come out of it.

Even as Phase I human trials of Bharat Biotech’s Covaxin, India’s first indigenous Covid-19 vaccine candidate, are on at most of the 12 sites selected by ICMR across the country, the Post-Graduate Institute (PGI) of Medical Sciences, Rohtak, has claimed “encouraging” results from first part of the tests. Earlier this week, AIIMS, Delhi, administered the first dose of Covaxin to a 30-year-old man. According to CTRI, the Covaxin phase I and II trials are expected to take one year and three months.
Rohtak PGIMS, which had commenced the first part of Phase-1 trials of Covaxin on July 17 on 50 volunteers, reported “encouraging” results, according to ANI. Principal investigator of the vaccine trial team, Dr Savita Verma, said six people have already been administered the vaccine under the second part of phase-1. Follow latest vaccine updates
Himachal Pradesh's COVID-19 case tally rises to 2,136. There are 929 active cases, 1,178 recovered cases and 12 deaths, the state health department said.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will on Monday launch "high throughput" COVID-19 testing facilities in Noida, Mumbai and Kolkata, which will boost the testing capacity and strengthen early detection and treatment in the country, the Prime Minister's Office said. Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan, along with the chief ministers of Maharashtra, West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh -- Uddhav Thackeray, Mamata Banerjee and Yogi Adityanath respectively, will be attend the virtual launch event.
The three high throughput testing facilities have already been set up strategically at ICMR institutions — National Institute of Cancer Prevention and Research in Noida, National Institute for Research in Reproductive Health in Mumbai and National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases in Kolkata. These have the capacity to test over 10,000 samples per day, a statement from the Prime Minister's Office said.
The Karnataka government has allowed Eid-ul-Azha prayers in the mosques only and that too with a maximum of 50 attendies at a time and said mass prayers at Eidgah and other places are prohibited in view of the coronavirus pandemic. People visiting the mosques for prayers will have to wear face masks and maintain the required social distancing, Minority Welfare and Wakf Department Secretary A B Ibrahim said in an order issued on Friday. It said the Hilal committee has decided that the Eid-ul-Azha, also known as Bakrid, would be celebrated on July 31 in Udupi, Dakshina Kannada and Kodagu districts while it would be on August 1 in the rest of the state.
Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan, who was admitted to hospital on Saturday after testing positive for Covid-19, shared he is fine now. In a video, which he posted on his Twitter handle, Chouhan spoke from his hospital ward apprising public about his health status.
प्रिय प्रदेशवासियों, आपको #COVID19 से डरने की जरूरत नहीं है। लक्षण प्रकट होते ही टेस्ट कराएं और पॉजिटिव होने पर तत्काल इलाज शुरू करवाएं तो कोरोना पर विजय अवश्य मिलेगी। इससे लड़ने का प्रमुख अस्त्र है, मास्क और दो गज की दूरी। इन अस्त्रों का प्रयोग अवश्य करें। #MPFightsCorona pic.twitter.com/Pyu2h6gAia
 Movie-goers wearing masks to protect themselves from the coronavirus are spaced apart as they watch a movie in a newly reopened cinema in Hangzhou in eastern China. (Chinatopix via AP)
Addressing the nation using his monthly radio address 'Mann ki Baat,' Prime Minister Narendra Modi said while India is in a better position when compared to other countries, there is no room for ignorance. "Today, the COVID19 recovery rate in our country is better than others. Our fatality rate is much less than most of the other countries. We managed to save the lives of lakhs of people, but the threat of coronavirus is not over yet. It is spreading fast in many areas, we need to remain vigilant. Whenever you feel like taking off your masks, think of frontline soldiers."
Meanwhile, Madhya Pradesh Cheif Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan Saturday became the first CM to test positive for the novel coronavirus. He is likely to get admitted to Chirayu hospital in capital city Bhopal. His reports came days after Cabinet Minister Arvind Bhadoria, who had attended a Cabinet meeting and had travelled with the CM to Lucknow to attend the funeral of Governor Lalji Tandon earlier this week. tested positive for the disease.
Rigorous implementation of pandemic lessons, systematic containment, and proper planning and procurement to plug the gaps in health infrastructure are key, the Centre has told nine states that are currently facing a surge in novel coronavirus infections. At a high-level review meeting that went on for three hours over a video link on Friday, the Centre emphasised six main issues to the governments of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Telangana, Odisha, West Bengal, Assam, Karnataka, Jharkhand, and Uttar Pradesh, top sources told The Indian Express.
Meanwhile, AIIMS Delhi on Friday administered first dose of Bharat Biotech’s Covaxin to a 30-year-old male. The subject will be monitored for two weeks after which he will be given the second dose.
Beijing partially reopened movie theatres Friday as the threat from the coronavirus continues to recede in China's capital. Cinemas in parts of the city deemed at low risk of cross-infection began admitting moviegoers under social distancing rules. Tickets must be booked in advance, attendance is capped at 30% of capacity and no eating or drinking is allowed during the show.
In India, Andhra Pradesh, which is in a midst of a big surge, reported almost 8,000 new cases of novel Coronavirus, pushing India within touching distance of 50,000-cases-a-day mark.
Odisha, meanwhile, has been contributing over 1,000 cases for the last two days, but is yet to report its daily numbers. For the last few days now, India has been more Coronavirus patients than any other country in the world except the United States. Brazil’s daily numbers have fallen in the last week, while India has risen from the level of about 35,000 to almost 50,000 now.
For the last two days, even Tamil Nadu seems to be searching for a new level. For more than a week, the state reported almost identical number of new cases, around the 4,500-mark. But it showed a jump on Wednesday with more than 5,800 new infections, and on Thursday, this went even further to 6,400.
These numbers have suddenly made Karnataka look much better. Karnataka was the fastest growing state till about a week ago, before Andhra Pradesh took over. It had surged past many states to become the state with the fourth-largest caseload. Even on Thursday, Karnataka added 5,000 cases, which till two days back, could have been the highest outside if Maharashtra. But because of the surge seen in Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka’s numbers look much more modest.
Explained: CDC’s new guidelines on when to end isolation for Covid-19 patients
On Wednesday, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) updated its guidelines for ending isolation and precautions for Covid-19 patients. With these new guidelines, the CDC is now focussing on a “symptom-based” strategy for ending isolation rather than a test-based strategy.
What are the new recommendations?
