Coronavirus 05 May Highlights: Total cases 42,835; with 510 new infections, Mumbai tally crosses 9-000 mark
As India entered the second extension of lockdown with considerable relaxations in orange and green zones, the total number of Covid-19 cases on Monday jumped to 42,835 and toll to 1,389 with 2,553 new infections. In the last 24 hours, a record 1,074 recoveries were reported taking the total number of cured patients to 11,761 and the recovery rate to 27.52%.
With no sign of a let-up in the number of Covid-19 cases in Mumbai, the tally crossed the 9,000-mark on Monday with 510 new patients, while 18 more died of the novel coronavirus infection. With 61 new recoveries in last one day, Kerala’s case count dropped from 95 to 34. Stating that the government will facilitate the return of Indians stranded abroad on compelling grounds, the Ministry of Home Affairs said the process will start from May 7 in a phased manner.
Congress president Sonia Gandhi on Monday said that the party’s State Congress Committees will bear the ticket expense of the train journey of migrant workers who are being sent back to their homes by various states. “This will be the Indian National Congress’ humble contribution in service of our compatriots and to stand shoulder to shoulder in solidarity with them,” her letter read. Sonia’s letter comes a day after the railways ordered the states to collect train ticket cost from the migrants. In its guidelines published Saturday, Railways said it would hand over the tickets to the originating states and the state would “collect the ticket fare” and hand them over to Railways. (Track India’s state-wise cases, deaths and recoveries here) 
Global coronavirus cases surpassed 3.5 million on Monday, with deaths nearing a quarter of a million, although the rate of fatalities and new cases has slowed from peaks reached last month

Having registered a sharp spike in COVID-19 cases over the past 48 hours, the Koyambedu wholesale market complex — one of the largest perishable goods markets in the country, spread across over 250 acres in Chennai — has authorities scrambling for corrective action. The market was shut down on Monday for a massive disinfection drive. Authorities point to the density of people and vehicles in the market and a lack of basic facilities. Even though measures were implemented since the last week of April, they fear that the action may not suffice.
The market area has roughly 500 shops — each with 3-10 workers and handling up to 300-400 vehicles each day. It is the largest source of perishable products for Chennai, districts in northern Tamil Nadu and even Tirupati and Nellore in Andhra Pradesh. On an average day, the market gets 50 per cent of its products from Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Gujarat and Maharashtra, among other states.
The number of COVID-19 cases in Maharashtra state police reached 422 by Sunday night. Of these, 116 are from the State Reserve Police Force (SRPF), which had been deployed in high-risk areas like Mumbai, Thane and Malegaon earlier, said officials.
As on the night of April 30, the number of police personnel diagnosed with COVID-19 in Maharashtra’s force was 227, which included 30 officers and 197 constables. Three days later, by the night of May 3, the number had increased to 422, which included 43 officers and 379 constables. Of the 422, 34 (eight officers and 26 constables) have already recovered. Read More
While the Union government rushed to announce that it will bear 85 per cent of the cost of migrants’ tickets after AICC chief Sonia Gandhi said that Congress will pay their ticket fare, over 8.6 lakh migrants — who have applied to leave Punjab for their home states — are not sure as when will their turn to board a train come.
Till Monday, 5.30 pm, over 8.6 lakh people registered on a government portal to leave, out of which 6.8 lakh have sought government transport, while another 1.84 lakh have indicated that they will go on their own. Read More
The soles of their feet cracked due to continuous pedaling, three agriculture workers felt they would faint any minute as they reached the Community Health Centre in Daroli Bhai of Moga Saturday night.
Angrej Singh (32), Jaspal Singh (50) and Beant Singh (20), who had traveled nearly 1,500 km in 14 days on their second-hand bicycles from Hoshangabad of Madhya Pradesh, asked the doctors to quarantine them and take their samples to test for the coronavirus. They resolved not to go to their homes in Rattian village or meet their families till they complete the quarantine period. Read More
The Gurgaon district administration issued guidelines for RWAs regarding various activities over the next two weeks of lockdown — after confusion prevailed across condominiums in the city in the absence of clear directions in this context.
On whether domestic helps can return to work or not, the administration has stated: “Systematic process for domestic help such as maids, house helps, drivers, dhobis, tailors, car cleaners etc., who do not stay within the RWA premises, may be planned by respective RWAs as per need.” Read more here
Not having the 'Aarogya Setu' app on smartphones while out in a public place in Noida or Greater Noida will be considered a violation of the coronavirus-forced lockdown and attract punishment, according to new guidelines issued by the police. Action will also be taken against people going outdoors without a face mask or spitting in public places, according to the police in Gautam Buddh Nagar in western Uttar Pradesh.
Aarogya Setu is a mobile application developed by the central government to connect essential health services with the people over the fight against COVID-19. PTI
Congress leader Rahul Gandhi will talk to Nobel Laureate Abhijit Banerjee Tuesday on dealing with the adverse economic outcome of Covid-19. Announcing this on Twitter, Gandhi urged all to tune in to his Youtube channel at 9 am Tuesday to watch the conversation. "Tomorrow at 9 am, tune in to watch my conversation with Nobel Laureate, Abhijit Banerjee on dealing with the economic fall out of the #COVID19 crisis," he wrote.
Tomorrow at 9 AM, tune in to watch my conversation with Nobel Laureate, Abhijit Banerjee on dealing with the economic fall out of the #COVID19 crisis. To join the conversation & for regular video updates, subscribe to my YouTube channel: https://t.co/4WBysSnKTg
With no sign of a let-up in the COVID-19 spread in Mumbai, the tally of cases crossed the 9,000-mark on Monday with the addition of 510 new patients, while 18 more died due to the viral infection, the city civic body said. The new cases, reported in the last 24 hours, took Mumbai's COVID-19 tally to 9,123, the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) said. (PTI)
The Malegaon Municipal Corporation is facing criticism over its handling of the Coronavirus outbreak. 44 medical staffers who were called in from Nashik to treat patients had to sleep in the open on Sunday after the MMC failed to make arrangements for their stay.
The Malegaon Municipal Corporation is facing criticism over its handling of the Coronavirus outbreak. 44 medical staffers who were called in from Nashik to treat patients had to sleep in the open on Sunday after the MMC failed to make arrangements for their stay.@IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/qLSHWMOkkv
With the entire Manipur listed under the green zone, the state government on Monday further relaxed the COVID-19-induced lockdown in more sectors.
As per the new guidelines, issued by the chief secretary of Manipur, markets were allowed to open from 6 am to 4 pm throughout the entire state except for the three historic Ima Markets (women markets), Nagapamal and Ngari galli markets. Earlier the relaxation was confined on locality-based retail shops dealing with essential commodities like groceries for daily use, vegetables, fruits, poultry meat, and fish from 6am to 2pm on all days except Sundays.
From Monday, all government offices were allowed to function subject to attendance of 50 per cent of employees against the earlier order of 33 per cent attendance, for those under secretary rank. Moreover, all private offices were allowed to open subject to strictly following social distancing norm. — Jimmy Leivon reports from Manipur



Monday has been a great day for Kerala in its efforts to fight the coronavirus pandemic. For the second consecutive day, the state reported no new cases of infection. At the same time, a total of 61 people recovered from the illness, the highest in a single day, taking the number of active cases from 95 to 34.
Among those who recovered, 19 were from Kannur district, 12 from Kottayam, 11 from Idukki, nine from Kollam, four from Kozhikode, two each from Malappuram, Thiruvananthapuram and Kasaragod, chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan said at his daily press briefing. With Monday’s developments, three more districts – Kozhikode, Malappuram and Thiruvananthapuram have joined the list of Covid-19 free districts. Kannur has the most number of active cases (18) remaining, followed by six in Kottayam and three each in Kollam and Kasaragod. READ MORE
While the pandemic-imposed lockdown has been hard for everyone, it has proven to be a battle for survival for migrant workers, tourists, students and out-of-towners who have been stuck in cities and districts far away from home during the lockdown. In fact, there are a lot of people who got stuck in an unfamiliar city where they had travelled to for treatment.
Bikash (30), a carpenter from Jhumri Telaiya in Jharkhand, and his wife (26) and his five-year-old son has been stuck in Vellore, Tamil Nadu for well over a month now. The family came to CMC Vellore on March 10 to receive treatment for his wife’s liver ailment. “My wife’s treatment got over on March 31 and by the time we could leave, we got stuck here with the lockdown.” Read Shivani Ramakrishnan's report



In two separate incidents on Monday afternoon, thousands of migrant workers came out on the streets in Vareli village of Surat district, and Palanpur area of Surat city, demanding to go home. In Vareli, migrants from Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, working in the textile dyeing and printing factories of Kadodara GIDC and powerloom units, came out on the streets chanting slogans and demanding to go back to their home states.
According to police sources, at that point, there were only five policemen present there, who tried telling the mob on loudspeakers to go back, but were pelted with stones. Two policemen were injured and several vehicles damaged by the workers, officers said. The police charged them with lathis and lobbed tear gas shells. At least 100 persons were detained, and offences registered against them at the Palsana police station. Read full story here
In a major embarrassment to the UT administration in Ladakh, Chief Executive Councillor of Leh’s Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council (LAHDC), Gyal P. Wangyal along with his Deputy Tsering Sandup, executive councilors and councilors held a dharna outside the resident of Lt Governor R K Mathur in protest over the delay in evacuation of local people stranded elsewhere the country in view of the continued lockdown due to the threat of COVID-19.
Tamil Nadu Covid-19 cases cross 3,500 
The Shree Jagannath Temple Managing Committee (SJTMC) would soon start the construction of chariots for the annual festival of Rath Yatra of Lord Jagannath which is scheduled to be held on June 23. Chariot construction could not start in view of the lockdown imposed in the wake of the COVID-19 outbreak in the country. Puri townin Odisha, where the popular Jagannath Temple is located, has so far not reported a single case of COVID-19, Puri Gajapati Maharaja Dibya Singha Deb said. He added that the pilgrim town comes under the green zone and therefore, there should be no restriction on construction activities.
A man arrested in a case of abetment to suicide tests positive for coronavirus. Now, 23 cops from Mundian police post and Jamalpur police station have been quarantined. This is the second such incident of an arrested person testing positive in Ludhiana.
Mandatory home or institutional quarantine for 14 days is what the Gujarat government plans for the diamond workers who are keen to leave Surat and return to their villages in Saurashtra, a senior state government official said on Monday.
The diamond markets located in Varaccha, Katargam, Punagam and Mahidherpura areas of Surat city have an estimated 4,000-odd diamond units that employ close to five lakh diamond workers. A large number of these workers hail from Saurashtra. Last week, the Surat Diamond Association had requested the state government to allow the diamond workers to return home. Read more here
 Migrants inside a train in Bhiwandi, Maharashtra. (Express Photo by Deepak Joshi)
Coronavirus India LIVE updates: The Union Home Ministry on Sunday made it clear that the relaxations given for the movement of people during the lockdown was available only to distressed migrant workers, PTI reported.
In a communication to all States and Union Territories, Union Home Secretary Ajay Bhalla said the MHA allowed movement of such stranded persons who had moved from their native places or workplaces just before the lockdown period, but could not return to their native places or workplaces on account of restrictions placed on movement of persons and vehicles as part of lockdown measures.
The facilitation envisaged in the orders is meant for such distressed persons, but does not extend to those categories of persons who are otherwise residing normally at places, other than the native places for purposes of work etc., and who wish to visit their native places in normal course, the communication said.
[ie_content_priority_driven hlabel="Coronavirus Explained" link="https://indianexpress.com/" hlink="https://indianexpress.com/section/explained/" pid="6372640" mlabel="Click here for more" mlink="https://indianexpress.com/about/coronavirus/"]
