India Coronavirus Updates, June 6: Shopping malls to remain shut in Gurugram, Faridabad; UP’s tally crosses 10K
Coronavirus India Updates: With a Covid-19 case count of 2,36,657, India has overtaken Italy to become the world’s sixth worst-hit nation by the coronavirus pandemic. The country reported a record single-day spike of 9,887 cases in the last 24 hours along with 294 fatalities taking the death toll to 6,642.
The number of coronavirus cases are going up everyday with 9,000 to 10,000 fresh cases reported in the last three days. Despite this, the national growth rate has slowed down by more than half a percentage point during this time. This concurrent trend can be attributed to fact that the transmission rate has been going down consistently over the last two months.
Also, the states that have the maximum number of cases, Maharashtra, Gujarat and Rajasthan, have been growing at a relatively slower pace, and have been able to negate the effect of higher growth rates in other states.
Follow coronavirus LIVE UPDATES
232 new coronavirus patients were reported in Madhya Pradesh on Saturday, taking the count of cases in the state to 9,228, health officials said. The virus also claimed 15 lives on the Saturday, increasing the death tollin the state to 399. Indore district accounts for 153 of these deaths.
Four persons from Indore, three from Ujjain, two each from Rajgarh and Ratlam and one each from Burhanpur, Khargone, Dhar and Sheopur succumbed to COVID-19, the health department said in its bulletin. The worst-hit Indore district has reported 3,722 COVID-19 cases, highest in the state, officials said.
Shopping malls and places of worship will not reopen for the public in Gurgaon and Faridabad districts, which have been worst-hit by COVID-19, for the time being, Haryana Home Minister Anil Vij said on Saturday. However, malls and religious place would open in other parts of Haryana from June 8, he said.
The Centre had on May 30 said that ‘Unlock-1’ will be initiated in the country from June 8 under which the nationwide COVID-19 lockdown effectuated on March 25 will be relaxed to a great extent, including opening of shopping malls, restaurants and religious places, even as strict restrictions will remain in place till June 30 in the country’s worst-hit areas.
Jammu and Kashmir on Saturday recorded 143 fresh COVID-19 cases, taking the total number of infections to 3,467, officials said. They said while 100 of these cases were reported from the Kashmir region, 43 were from Jammu. “143 new positive cases of coronavirus were detected in the union territory on Saturday,” one of them said.
The officials said the total number of cases in Jammu and Kashmir has now reached 3,467 — 2,615 in Kashmir region, 852 in Jammu. They said there are 2,302 active cases in the union territory — 1,646 in Kashmir and 656 in Jammu. A total of 1,126 patients have recovered, they said.
The UT has witnessed 39 COVID-19 related deaths.
Restaurants in Punjab will continue to remain shut for dine-in customers even beyond June 8 when the state government has allowed opening of malls, where you can shop for clothes but without trying them on, and from when you can visit places of worship but where you won’t be served ‘prasad’ or langar.
According to the guidelines issued by the Punjab government Saturday, restaurants or food courts in malls will not operate except for take away or home delivery. Guests in hotels will have to be served food in their rooms. The decision will be reviewed on June 15.
The number of coronavirus positive cases in Uttar Pradesh crossed the 10,000-mark with 370 fresh cases reported on Saturday even as the number of casualties rose to 268.
The number of COVID-19 cases in the state now stands at 10,103 as on Saturday. Principal secretary, health, Amit Mohan Prasad said the number of active cases in the state was 3,927 and the number of those who have recovered and been discharged from hospitals was 5,908.
So, far 268 people have lost their lives to coronavirus with 11 more deaths, Prasad said.
Nearly eleven weeks after the famous Mahakaleshwar temple in Ujjain city of Madhya Pradesh was shut due to the coronavirus outbreak, its doors will be reopened for devotees from Monday, its office-bearer said. However, those who wish to visit the temple will have to register their names first, he said.
The Mahakaleshwar temple in Ujjain, located around 175 kms from Bhopal, is one of the 12 “jyotirlingas” in the country and attracts lakhs of devotees every year. The reopening of the temple is part of the easing of lockdown restrictions in the state.
The spike in COVID-19 cases in Goa is due to the situation in Vasco’s Mangor Hill area, which has been declared a containment zone, and there is no threat of community transmission of the coronavirus infection, state health minister Vishwajit Rane said on Saturday.
The state currently has 196 COVID-19 cases. “The spike in cases in Goa is due to cases from Mangor Hill, which are a result of local transmission and not community transmission. The Goa government is ready to face any situation to ensure the safety of its people,” Rane said.
The number of new coronavirus in the country between May 15 and May 20 were growing at about 4,000 to 5,000 new cases every day. For the last three days, between 9,000 and 10,000 new cases are being detected. And yet, the national growth rate has slowed down by more than half a percentage point during this time.
Even though the new cases are increasing every day, they are still lower than what is required to maintain the same growth rate. Twenty five states and union territories that are growing faster than the national growth rate have relatively smaller caseloads. The ones that contribute the maximum to the national caseload, Maharashtra, Gujarat and Rajasthan, have been growing at a considerably slower pace, and have been able to negate the effect of higher growth rates in other states.
A world Health Organisation expert Friday cautioned that coronavirus in India has not “exploded” but is at risk of exploding as the country moves towards unlocking its nationwide lockdown.
WHO Health Emergencies Programme Executive Director Michael Ryan said the doubling time of the coronavirus cases in India is about three weeks at this stage. Ryan noted that measures taken in India such as the nationwide lockdown have had an impact in slowing transmission but the risk of an increase in cases looms as the country opens up.
At 12.3 per cent, the death rate for Covid-19 in Jalgaon, a district 400 km north-east of Mumbai, is the highest in Maharashtra. Four cities — Jalgaon, Bhusawal, Amalner and Pachora — account for 80 per cent of the 112 deaths till June 4. Jalgaon’s death rate today is more than four times the national average of about 2.8 per cent.
The state government has now set up a 10-member committee to audit each death and assess the reasons behind it. A number of factors are contributing to the high rate of cases in the district. Health care neglect, little to no counselling for staff and doctors, delays in testing, lack of patient monitoring, and easy entry and exit of general public in isolation wards are some of them.

