Coronavirus May 19 Highlights: Record 1,08,233 samples tested in a day, says Health Ministry
With India reporting 4,970 cases in the last 24 hours, the total number of infections due to the coronavirus pandemic crossed the 1 lakh-mark to reach 101,139 from 96,169 on Monday, while the death toll rose to 3,163 on Tuesday. Dharavi in Mumbai reported 26 new COVID-19 cases, taking overall count to 1,353, BMC said.
The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has asked states to allow plying of more trains to ferry migrant workers, adding that more clarity is needed about the departure of trains or buses. It also said that lack of clarity about running of trains, buses coupled with rumours is causing unrest amongst migrant workers.
In Bihar, of the 835 samples taken from migrant workers who returned from Delhi, as many as 218 were Covid positive. This works out to a positivity rate of over 26 per cent, while the rate in the national capital is about 7 per cent. Until May 18, the state tested a total of 8,337 samples of migrant workers and about 8% were found to be Covid-positive — double the national average positivity rate which is about 4%.
Globally, 4.8 million people have been infected, while over 3.18 lakh casualties have been reported. World Health Organisation (WHO) Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus on Monday said he will “initiate an independent evaluation” at “the earliest appropriate moment”. Beijing, which has been under mounting global pressure, also seemed to have relented on its opposition for an inquiry into the origin of the virus, believed to be a wet market in Wuhan.

After 58 days, Hyderabad returned to an almost-normal life Tuesday following relaxation in the lockdown norms that permitted all shops and establishments, businesses and offices, both private and public, to start operations in full strength except in containment zones.
In the case of shops, an odd-even policy has been adopted with each of them painted with either 1 or 2 on the outside. The shops numbered 1 will open on odd days, and even-numbered shops will open on other days of the week, Monday being Day One. Read more here
Pune district recorded 10 deaths due to Covid-19 on Tuesday. The toll has now climbed to 221.
While eight deaths took place in the PMC limits, two were reported from Pimpri-Chinchwad, said District Health Officer Dr Bhagwan Pawar.
The district also recorded 193 new cases, taking the total number to 4,370, Dr Pawar said. Read more here
Jharkhand government Tuesday announced e token systems, delivery via professional food aggregators in a bid to avoid overcrowding at the liquor stores in the state. The sale of liquor will begin May 20 which was suspended since the lockdown and the retail sales will be prohibited between 7 pm to 7 am.
Along with the regular counter sales, the Excise Department said that people would use an application developed by the state NIC to get ‘e tokens’ and based on the allotted timings they will be able buy it from the respective shops. The shop owners will give them priority and a separate line will be maintained for them. “This will help in managing the crowd and the shops have been advised to maintain proper social distancing during the delivery,” a source said.
The department is also ‘trying’ to get professional food aggregators on board for home delivery. “After the department’s permission the aggregators would be able to tie with the retail liquor shops in various towns,” the excise department order said.
Abhishek Angad reports from Ranchi
As many as 1,000 students, working professionals and stranded residents from Jammu and Kashmir left for the state by the special Udhampur-bound train from Pune station on Tuesday. As the train left the station at 7 pm, the exuberant passengers clapped and cheered while maintaining social distancing in the compartments.
“We are all delighted as we are going home. Pune was a home away from home for us. Though we were stuck here, we didn’t feel depressed and disappointed as Pune residents took care of our food and accommodation. We had absolutely no problems during this difficult period here in Pune,” said Aqib Bhat, president of Sarhad Kashmiri-Students Union, Pune. Read more here
All markets in Chandigarh opened on Tuesday after a hiatus of sixty days including tourist spot, Sector 17 plaza and the congested rehri markets. However, most residents preferred to stay indoors and only the mobile market of Sector 22 witnessed some rush.
While shops in plaza and other sector dividing roads were allowed to open without the odd-even scheme, rehri markets and other congested still had that basis. Read more here
Nagpur Municipal Commissioner Tukaram Mundhe has said the city will continue to be in the “red zone” of the coronavirus outbreak till May 22. He warned of strict action against those who break lockdown norms till further orders were issued.
In a video message, Mundhe said, “Nagpur is not named in the (red zone) order issued by the state government. The city has seen three deaths in the last four to five days. The city still has some hotspots from where people are being quarantined. This situation will be brought to the notice of the state government. In any case, today’s order is not applicable till May 22. So, the rumours about Nagpur coming out of red zone mustn’t be believed. Anyone found breaking lockdown rules will be strictly dealt with as per the Disaster Management and Epidemic Acts and the IPC.” Read more here
With five percent of the total population in Gujarat put under containment (based on data provided by the state health department), the highest numbers are in Ahmedabad. Nearly 13 lakh persons residing in 2,61,511 houses are contained in ten wards and one pocket of the city.
Being the city with the highest number of Covid-19 cases and mortality rate in Gujarat, this is nearly 23 per cent of its population (as per census 2011). Read more here
A day after a BJP legislator accused Khandwa collector Tanvi Sundriyal of alleged negligence in handling COVID 19 challenge in the district, the government late on Tuesday transferred the IAS officer to Bhopal.
BJP MLA from Pandhana constituency Ram Dangore wrote to the Chief Minister on Monday demanding that the 2010 officer be transferred for her failure to contain the spread of the infection.
``Khandwa is passing through a sensitive phase. The collector is hiding death toll,'' the legislator alleged in the letter and wondered why the intelligence department not apprising the CM of coverage by media, social media and public. ``One more positive case has been reported in my constituency we need a new collector for better monitoring,'' he said.
Sundriyal was transferred as executive director of Environmental Planning and Coordination Organisation (EPCO). Khandwa has so far reported 165 positive cases and nine deaths. The bureaucrat could not be reached for her comment. Incidentally, she had not allowed liquor shops to reopen in the district though the government had permitted it. 
Milind Ghatwai reports from Bhopal
Four more COVID-19 cases have been identified in Tripura on Tuesday, raising the total coronavirus positive count to 173 in the state. However, only 57 of them are active cases as 116 patients were discharged from isolation center in hospitals and quarantined as per latest reports.
Chief Minister Biplab Kumar Deb informed on his official Twitter handle about the new cases and wrote, "850 samples have been tested for #COVID19 today and among them 4 persons found POSITIVE. All four #COVID19 patients have returned from Chennai and are now under treatment. We are committed to ensure your safety. Stay safe! #TripuraCOVID19Count".
These new cases are the first positive cases found among civilians in the state. Earlier, only BSF jawans tested positive. These cases were also found among people who returned to Tripura in the last few days from Chennai. All of them were rushed to Govind Ballabh Panth Hospital in Agartala for treatment.
Debraj Deb reports from Agartala
Nagpur Municipal Commissioner Tukaram Mundhe has said that the city continues to be in Red zone till May 22nd. Citizens must not break the stipulations that go with it till his further orders or else face strict action.
In a video message, Mundhe has said, "Nagpur is not named in the(Red zone) order issued by the state government. The city has seen three deaths in the last 4-5days. The city still has some hotspots from where people are still being quarantined. This situation will be brought to the notice of the state government. In any case, today's order is not applicable till May 22. So, the rumours about Nagpur coming out of Red zone mustn't be believed. Anyone found breaking the lockdown rules will be strictly dealt with as per Disaster Management and Epidemic Acts and IPC."
Mundhe further said, "my office will issue different (vegale) order before May 22." Earlier in the day, Nagpur bench of Bombay High Court, while hearing on a clutch of petitions challenging Mundhe's earlier lockdown guidelines, said, "the state government has issued revised guidelines dated May 19, 2020, removing Nagpur from the Red zone. It is obvious that the appropriate authority, including the Municipal Commissioner shall have to issue revised guidelines in the light of latest development."
Vivek Deshpande reports from Nagpur
Starting Wednesday, the south east district police will deploy static announcement systems in areas such as Sarai Kale Khan and Srinivaspuri especially for migrant labourers who are hoping to return to their homes in other states. 
The pre-recorded announcements will be about "how to apply for train journeys, where to get medical screening done, and to stay indoors till proper travel arrangements aren't done," said DCP (Southeast) R P Meena.
So far, 51 static announcement systems have been placed in the district -- from containment zones to crowded markets to border pickets. "As of Tuesday, 11 containment zones remain in the Southeast district such as Zakir Nagar, Tughlaqabad Extension, and the pre-recorded messages here request people to stay indoors, maintain social distancing inside their homes, and who to approach for delivery services and medical emergencies," said Meena.
The systems at border pickets, in the meantime, focus on telling people that "only two people are allowed per vehicle, and to wear a mask."
Somya Lakhani reports from New Delhi
On Tuesday, Assam recorded its highest single-day spike with as many as 39 people testing positive for COVID-19. Out of the 39 new cases, 16 cases have been reported from the capital, Guwahati.
This includes 14 from the Sarusajai quarantine centre, which is currently housing several people who have returned to the state by train in the last week. Youngest among these is a 2-month-old baby. Other two cases in the city can be traced to the cancer patient who recently died of the virus.
The remaining cases have been reported from districts spread across the state: Karimganj, Kamrup, Hojai, Biswanath, Nalbari, Kokrajhar, Golaghat, Nagaon and Jorhat. “In view of the rising number I earnestly request you to #StayAtHome and follow #SocialDistancing & hygiene norms” tweeted state Health Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma. The state currently has 107 active cases, with four deaths.-- Tora Agarwala reports from Guwahati
As many as 20 containment zones in have been identified in Bengaluru in 19 wards within BBMP limits.
As many as 20 containment zones in #Bengaluru have been identified in 19 wards within BBMP limits. @IndianExpress (Source: BBMP #COVID19 war room data, May 19) pic.twitter.com/Ea3AO72gqe
Migrant families walking toward the bus provided by the state transport, when police called for the residents of Hardoi, UP, under Sector 51 Metro station, Noida. Buses will drop them at Dadri Railway Station, from there they will either take train or bus on there own.
Migrant families walking toward the bus provided by the state Transport, when Police called for the residents of Hardoi, UP, under Sector 51 Metro station, Noida. Buses will drop them at Dadri Rly Station, from there they will either take train or bus on thr own. @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/vuXuVa32tt

Liquor shops will be allowed to be open across Jammu and Kashmir from Wednesday with the Union Territory easing restrictions as part of its new lockdown guidelines till May 31.
Apart from liquor shops, all private hospitals, clinics and nursing homes (including OPD services) will resume normal functioning including OPD services, the order said, adding the other activities including all E-commerce and courier services; all agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandary and related activities; home delivery by restaurants and hotels; banks and financial services; self employed service providers like plumbers, technicians, electricians etc, will be allowed.
The canteens/eateries at bus stands, railway stations and airports have also been allowed to open in the UT, but with passes in Red districts. Similarly barbour shops, salons and parlours will also open in all the areas except within the limits of Municipal Corporations of Jammu and Srinagar cities. Read more

With the Union government scrapping the need of obtain the consent of destination states to dispatch a Shramik Special train, the Pune district administration plans to send out 10 such trains per day to various states, especially Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, to ferry the lakhs of workers stuck here. Till now, authorities have been running four to five trains a day.
Pune District Collector Naval Kishore Ram said following the Union government’s amended directives, he held discussions with Divisional Railway Manager Renu Sharma, and a policy to increase daily departures has been devised.
“The railway authorities have conveyed to us that they can operate seven Shramik Specials from Pune station, two from Uruli station and two from Daund station. Thus, 11 trains can depart Pune every day,” said Ram.


Salons and garment shops reopen in Ludhiana under revised provisions in lockdown 4.0. (Express photos by Gurmeet Singh)
At least 28 fresh Covid-19 cases were recorded in Jammu and Kashmir on Tuesday of which 6 were from the Jammu Division and 22 from the Kashmir division. One person succumbed to the virus in Kashmir division, officials said.
28 fresh COVID-19 cases in JK today. Six from Jammu Division and 22 from Kashmir division. One Covid-19 linked death today in Kashmir: Officials @IndianExpress
At least 688 people tested Covid-19 positive in Tamil Nadu today, taking the tally to 12,448. Chennai reported 552 new cases. 87 returnees from Dubai, Kuwait, Malaysia, Maharashtra, Maldives, and Kerala tested positive. 489 were discharged, and three deaths reported.
688 people tested #Covid19 +ve in #TN today, taking the tally to 12,448. #Chennai reported 552 new cases. 87 returnees from Dubai, Kuwait, Malaysia, Maharashtra, Maldives, and Kerala tested positive. 489 were discharged, and three deaths reported in #TN today. @IndianExpress
Maharashtra reports 2,100 new COVID-19 cases, taking tally to 37,158: Health Minister Rajesh Tope. (PTI)
 Coronavirus India LIVE Updates: Thousands gathered at Ramlila Maidan in Ghaziabad on Monday to register for six trains bound for other parts of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.
Meanwhile, as the lockdown has been eased across the country, and more migrant workers return to their home states, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) Monday revised the testing protocol to include symptomatic “returnees and migrants”, hospitalised patients and “frontline workers”. The lockdown has been extended for two more weeks till May 31.
On Monday, the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) Monday released guidelines on measures to be taken to contain the spread of Covid-19 at workplaces. According to a circular released by the MHA, there are four types of measures to be taken to check the spread of the virus — Basic preventive measures, Preventive measures for offices, Measures to be taken on occurrence of cases and closure of workplaces.
Issuing detailed guidelines for workplaces, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare said: “If there are one or two cases reported, the disinfection procedure will be limited to places/ areas visited by the patient in past 48 hrs. There is no need to close the entire office building/ halt work in other areas of the office and work can be resumed after disinfection as per laid down protocol.”
“However, if there is a larger outbreak, the entire building will have to be closed for 48 hours after thorough disinfection. All the staff will work from home, till the building is adequately disinfected and is declared fit for re-occupation,” it said.
“The high risk exposure contacts (those who were in close contact) shall be quarantined for 14 days. They will follow the guidelines on home quarantine and undergo testing as per ICMR protocol,” the ministry said. “The low risk exposure contacts shall continue to work and closely monitor their health for the next 14 days,” it said. If there is a suspected case, employers must inform the health authorities who will assess the symptoms and case history to determine testing, home isolation or other measures.
The government, however, has maintained that there is no community transmission so far.
“Some patients may develop an infection in hospital, so we are testing for that. Also, on the same lines as testing international travellers, we are testing symptomatic domestic travellers with only the migrants,” Dr Manoj Murhekar, Director, ICMR-National Institute of Epidemiology (NIE), said.
While 23,02,792 samples have been tested so far, the positivity rate has remained around 4% since the beginning of April. However, the government stopped giving the number of individuals tested since April.
 Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal during a digital press conference. (PTI Photo)
Meanwhile, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal Monday announced that bus service in the capital will resume but only 20 passengers will be allowed at a time. “Screening of passengers will be done before entering. Social distancing will be maintained on each depot,” he said.
“Barbershops, spas and salons to remain closed for now. People will be allowed to step out of their homes between 7 am to 7 pm only. Taxis and cabs will be allowed, but only with 2 passengers at a time,” he announced.
Union Minister in charge of Road Transport and Highways and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Nitin Gadkari, who was the guest at the Indian Express e-adda on Monday, said the vision of the government for the country’s economic revival was “perform, reform, transform”. He also said the Centre and Central PSUs would clear pending MSME dues in 45 days.
