Coronavirus April 21 Highlights: Day after lockdown relaxation, Noida seals border with Delhi
Coronavirus India: A day after some relaxation was allowed to the extended lockdown period, Noida on Tuesday joined Ghaziabad in sealing its border with Delhi. Essential goods, government officials that have valid passes, ambulances, mediapersons with passes and doctors remain the only exception.
The central government will be conducting a telephonic survey on the coronavirus pandemic calling up citizens on their mobile phones across the country. This will be carried out by NIC and calls will be made from the number 1921.
The death toll due to the coronavirus pandemic in India rose to 603 Tuesday while the total number of confirmed cases nearing the 19,000 mark to reach 18,985 including 3,259 people who have been treated and discharged, according to the latest data by the health ministry. Maharashtra tops the tally with 232 fatalities, followed by Gujarat at 77, Madhya Pradesh at 76, Delhi at 47, Rajasthan at 25, Telangana at 23 and Andhra Pradesh at 22. Globally, there are over 2.4 million infections with 170,261 deaths.
The ICMR Tuesday said it would advice the states to not use the rapid test kits for two days after Rajasthan stopped using the kits for delivering inaccurate results. In its daily press briefing, ICMR’s Dr R R Gangakhedkar said, “Too much variations were being reported in results of rapid test kits. In next two days, kits will be tested and validated in the field by our teams. States will be advised not to use these kits for two days. ICMR will give advisory on its use in two days.”
Meanwhile, a housekeeping staff member working at the Lok Sabha secretariat tested positive for COVID-19 Tuesday and was admitted to the Safdarjung hospital.
On the international front, a total of 2,475,871 confirmed cases have been reported from across the globe with the US reporting the highest number of cases at 786,638 followed by Spain (200,210), Italy (181,228), France (156,480) and Germany (147,065).

Vadodara has reported its 10th death due to the novel coronavirus, taking the total number of cases to 198. 63 year old man from Methi gaam, Karjan taluka of the district, died after testing positive on Tuesday. He had co-morbidity with Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and chronic kidney disease.
Vadodara reports 10th #Covid19 death and 198th positive case. 63 yr old man from Methi gaam, Karjan taluka of the district, dies after testing positive on Tuesday. Had Co-morbidity with Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and chronic kidney disease. @IndianExpress
Allegations made against Delhi’s Lok Nayak Hospital on Monday by family of a COVID-19 patient were not “ingrained in facts” but stemmed from “emotional distress,” a report by the hospital administration said Tuesday.
The daughter and wife of the patient, residing in Jahangirpuri, had alleged mismanagement and delay in treatment on behalf of the hospital authorities. The daughter had said that the patient was not given food for several hours and that he was not given proper care despite running a fever of 102 degrees Fahrenheit.
The Supreme Court on Tuesday junked a plea which sought free treatment for all COVID-19 patients and warned the petitioner “do not create publicity interest litigation”. A bench comprising Justices N.V. Ramana, Sanjay Kishan Kaul and B.R. Gavai, which heard the petition through video conferencing, said the court does not have any fund and that it was for the government to decide whom to treat free and whom not.
Justice Kaul pointed out that the treatment was already free in government hospitals and added “we think this case should close now, no need to raise any litigation like this”. The bench also dismissed a plea which sought regulation of price of masks and hand sanitisers,
The court which took strong exception told the petitioner who was a lawyer that lack of legal work did not mean he could file petitions of such nature and added that it was of the mind to impose costs for wasting the court’s time. However, it spared him of any cost.
The court also delcined to entertain the prayer by an animal rights activists who contended that the lockdown was affecting food supply to animals in zoos. Justice Kaul obseved that animals in zoos too had to be looked after but added that it was for the government to do the needful.
A total of 4,62,621 samples from 4,47,812 individuals have been tested for novel coronavirus as on April 21. Today, on 21 April 2020, till 9 PM IST 26,943 samples have been reported.
After a gap of one day, the @ICMRDELHI testing update is back, in a curtailed format. "A total of 4,62,621 samples from 4,47,812 individuals tested as on 21 April 2020, 9 PM IST. Today, on 21 April 2020, till 9 PM IST 26,943 samples have been reported." @IndianExpress #COVIDー19
After Ghaziabad, Noida  has sealed its border with Delhi. Essential goods, government officials that have valid passes, ambulances, mediapersons with passes and doctors remain the only exception.
After Ghaziabad, Noida seals it's border with Delhi. Essential goods, government officials that have valid passes, ambulances, mediapersons with passes and doctors only exception. #coronavirus @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/YlTJDeZWGa
Treatment facilities for seeds, horticulture produce, research establishments, honey bee colonies allowed to open during lockdown: MHA
A 52-year-old woman from Taljai died of respiratory failure linked to coronavirus on Tuesday, while Sassoon General Hospital registered the death of a COVID-19 patient, a 57-year-old woman from Kondhwa, on Monday. With the two deaths in two days, the death toll in Pune has risen to 54.
The 52-year-old woman was admitted to Deenanath Mangeshkar Hospital on April 19 and had hypertension, said Dr Sanjeev Wavare, assistant medical officer of health at Pune Municipal Corporation. She passed away on Tuesday due to COVID-19-related complications.
At Sassoon General Hospital, authorities said the total number of deaths were 43. The 57-year-old woman from Kondhwa was admitted on April 19 and she had co-morbidities like diabetes. While she died on at 2.20 pm on Monday, the swab sample taken from her tested positive hours later, on Monday night.
Chief Minister of Delhi, Arvind Kejriwal, on April 21 said that 2,081 COVID-19 cases have been reported in Delhi till April 20. Out of these, 431 have been recovered and 47 have lost their lives due to the virus. Currently, there are 1,603 active cases in national capital.
Chief Minister of Delhi, Arvind Kejriwal, on April 21 said that 2,081 COVID-19 cases have been reported in Delhi till April 20. Out of these, 431 have been recovered and 47 have lost their lives due to the virus. Currently, there are 1,603 active cases in national capital. pic.twitter.com/A9urkkdk5Z
The Supreme Court on Tuesday adjourned hearing on petitions seeking restoration of 4G Internet services in Jammu and Kashmir in view of the COVID-19 situation with the centre stating that “militancy is still” being reported from the region and that the issue involved question of “national security”.
Attorney General K K Venugopal told a bench of Justices N V Ramana, R Subhash Reddy and B R Gavai that it is a “very serious issue”. He submitted that when a militant was killed recently, a large number of people came for the funeral and that the militants were being made into martyrs.
Kerala today saw a spike in the number of Coronavirus cases being reported with 19 new cases being confirmed today. Ten of the new cases are from Kannur district, four in Palakkad district, three from Kasargod district, and one each in Malappuram and Kollam districts. Of these, 13 persons have returned from abroad, three from Tamil Nadu and one from Uttar Pradesh. The rest two are cases of local transmission.
At the same time, 16 patients under treatment have recovered from the disease. Seven patients from Kannur district, four each in Kasargod and Kozhikode districts, and one from Thiruvananthapuram district are those whose test results came as negative.
The total number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in Kerala till date is 426 and currently, 117 patients are undergoing treatment in various hospitals across the State. 307 patients have so far recovered from Coronavirus.
Emirates announces new pandemic induced dress code for staff.
From personal protective equipment (PPE) for cabin crew and airport teams to modified inflight services, we have stepped up safety measures for customers and employees at the airport and on board.#FlyEmiratesFlyBetter https://t.co/BNMUXp2vKO pic.twitter.com/UX4mFgQTOW
Government of India to conduct a telephone survey on prevalence of Covid-19.
Government of India to conduct a telephone survey on prevalence of #Covid_19india ⁦@IndianExpress⁩ pic.twitter.com/LOk2f4M7o2
In a statement, the Ministry of Home Affairs said that bedside attendants, care givers of senior citizens residing in their homes allowed to offer services during lockdown. It also said that recharge facilities for prepaid mobile connections will also be allowed during lockdown.
Bread factories, milk processing plants, flour, dal mills in urban areas allowed to function during lockdown, MHA added. (PTI)
The second COVID-19 patient of Manipur, who tested negative for the virus after two consecutive tests, was discharged on Tuesday.
The first test was conducted on the 56-year-old man from Thoubal district, on Saturday followed by a second test on Sunday which also came negative. While he was discharged from the Isolation ward of Regional Institute of Medical Sciences (RIMS), surveillance over him will continue, said Manipur health department.
The man who attended Tablighi Jamaat event in New Delhi tested positive on April 1 making him the second positive case in the state. He returned to Imphal from Delhi on March 11. He was evacuated to RIMS on March 31.
Manipur Chief Minister N Biren Singh appealed to the people never to take it easy with the notion that the state has zero positive case now.
The Chief Minister said that the long battle against deadly Coronavirus is just a beginning which requires a systematic approach to come out victorious.
N Biren Singh on Tuesday said that the state government has also mooted on the feasibility of opening a grocery kiosk in selected border areas to prevent people from crossing border to purchase essential items.
He said that Manipur needs to maintain extra vigil along its border areas to check incoming of infected persons as even slight negligence may lead to an unmanageable situation. Singh said that he had directed Director General of Police L.M. Khaute to reinforce with more police force in Churachandpur district to increase the number of check posts.
Despite accounting for a fifth of the world’s population (21 per cent), the eight SAARC nations — India, Pakistan, the Maldives, Sri Lanka, Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan — account for just 1.28 per cent of the world total of 24,80,503 coronavirus cases. In terms of fatalities, the SAARC total is nearly half a percentage point (0.54 per cent) or 937 of the total of 1,70,397 people who have died of the infection worldwide, according to data by worldometers.
The SAARC countries have recorded much lower infection rates in the region compared to the worst affected countries, including the US, Italy, Spain, the UK, Iran and China.
However, the number of coronavirus cases in the SAARC region is growing by an average of 8.61 per cent as compared to the world average rate of 3.66 per cent. Moreover, cases are doubling in the SAARC region in less than half the number of days (8.36 days) than the global average of 19.65 days. Read more
Four more people have tested positive for Coronavirus in Gurgaon today. Total cases in the district now 41, of which 26 have recovered.
4 more people have tested positive for Coronavirus in Gurgaon today. Total cases in the district now 41, of which 26 have recovered. @IndianExpress
Two persons died due to the coronavirus in Pune on Tuesday. 42 cases were detected today while 19 were discharged after they were cured of the virus.
In @PMCPune on April 20: 2 #COVIDー19 deaths, 42 new patients and 19 discharge after free from disease. #punecorona #Covid19India @IndianExpress @ExpressPune
As per relaxation criteria for lockdown advised by Government of India, about 53 industries resumed production at Bodhjungnagar industrial growth centre, RK Nagar, Dukli and Badharghat areas.
A press statement issued from the Chief Minister’s Office (CMO) today informed that the industrial activities were resumed whilst maintaining social distancing and other public hygienic measures. At the same time, construction of Water Supply treatment plants at Usha Baazar and Panchmukh were started using the migrant labourers available in the city as well.
‘Due to starting of industrial and urban development works, much needed relief is granted to entrepreneurs, contractors as well as employees who were waiting for more than 3 weeks”, the statement said.
Tea estates and brick kilns were allowed to operate from last week itself with involvement of over 35,000 labourers.

Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh on Tuesday urged Union Home Minister Amit Shah to allow Punjab pilgrims stranded in Nanded in Maharashtra to return home, This comes after Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray said the Centre’s permission was required for the return of the pilgrims.
In his letter, CM Amarinder Singh said he had already spoken to his Uddhav over telephone in this regard as a follow-up to his earlier letter of March 25. The chief minister also apprised Shah that the pilgrims, mostly belonging to farming families, were extremely anxious to return to Punjab in view of the Rabi harvesting season, which had commenced in the state from April 15.
The Chief Minister assured the Union Minister that all the pilgrims, on their arrival in Punjab, would be screened and quarantined as per the Centre's health protocol.

The Dharavi slum sprawl in Mumbai on Tuesday reported 12 new COVID-19 cases with one death, a senior BMC official said. With this, the total number of the coronavirus-afflicted people in this congested locality reached 180.
The number of the deceased has gone up to 12 with a 62-year-old man succumbing to the coronavirus infection earlier in the day, the official said.
The new cases, including three women patients, were found in Mukund Nagar, Madina Nagar, Rajiv Gandhi Nagar, and Muslim Nagar localities of Dharavi. (PTI)
 Coronavirus LIVE updates: Health workers at Tikonia village near Indra nagar area of Lucknow.
A day after it directed Kerala to rectify its lockdown relaxations saying some of the concessions diluted national guidelines, the Centre singled out more states, putting under strain the common exit strategy that the Prime Minister had urged states to help frame in the country’s efforts against COVID-19.
There is a sense that area-specific lockdowns and relaxations will have to be the norm, depending on the rise and fall in cases, till September at least. While the government hopes that the second wave will not touch the March high of 3.4 days doubling time, it will still mean a rise in fresh cases.
The Union government is looking at various options for “gradual” lifting of the lockdown post-May 3 and hopes that the doubling time of COVID-19 cases will increase to 12 days by then, but sources have said that the government is preparing for a second wave in late May or early June, as restrictions are eased.
On Monday, the Centre informed West Bengal, Maharashtra, Rajasthan — all ruled by the Opposition — and Madhya Pradesh that lockdown measures were being routinely flouted in their districts, and it was sending six newly-constituted Inter-Ministerial Central Teams (IMCTs) for on-the-spot assessment of the situation there.The IMCTs, which will submit a report to the Centre, have been authorised to issue necessary directions to state authorities for redressal. Headed by Additional Secretary-rank officers from the Centre, the IMCTs will start the inspection visits within three days of the order.
Incidentally, West Bengal and Maharashtra are among the handful of states where doubling time of COVID-19 cases is currently less than the national average of 7.5 days. Doubling time is an epidemiological metric of how fast an infectious disease is spreading.
Crude oil rebounded in early Asian trading after plunging below zero for the first time in history as the US benchmark’s May contract entered its final trading session. Futures in New York traded at around $1 a barrel after sinking to as low as minus $40.32 a barrel during Monday’s jaw-dropping collapse.
Ever since the Prime Minister’s call for a Janata Curfew on March 22, states have been following the Centre’s line on battling the outbreak. There has hardly been any public criticism of the Centre’s decisions – there were suggestions though that states were taken by surprise when the first national lockdown was announced on March 24. All political parties have broadly agreed with the contours of the Centre’s plan to fight the pandemic.
Meanwhile, US oil markets created history on Monday when prices of West Texas Intermediate (WTI), the best quality of crude oil in the world, fell to “minus” $40.32 a barrel in New York. Not only is this the lowest crude oil price ever known — according to Bloomberg, the previous lowest was immediately after World War II — but also well below the zero-mark.
 Coronavirus LIVE updates: Futures in New York traded at around $1 a barrel after sinking to as low as minus $40.32 a barrel during Monday’s jaw-dropping collapse.
Also, US President Donald Trump Monday said he will temporarily suspend immigration into the United States. “In light of the attack from the Invisible Enemy, as well as the need to protect the jobs of our GREAT American Citizens, I will be signing an Executive Order to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States”, Trump said in a tweet late on Monday.
Don't miss these articles on Coronavirus from the Explained section:
‣ How coronavirus attacks, step by step
‣ Mask or no mask? Why the guidance has been shifting
‣ Besides a face cover, should I wear gloves when I go outdoors?
