Coronavirus India Updates, 16 June: ‘Covid-19 situation worsening with each passing day,’ says SC
India Coronavirus Latest Update: With 10,667 cases and 380 fatalities in the last 24 hours, the coronavirus infections in India soared to 3,43,091 with death toll rising to 9,900 on Tuesday. Of the total, 1,53,178 are active cases while 1,80,012 people have been cured and discharged so far, according to the health ministry. Around 52.46 per cent patients have recovered so far.
Statewise, of the 380 new casualties, Maharashtra accounted for the highest 178 fatalities followed by Delhi at 73, Tamil Nadu at 44, Gujarat 28, Haryana 12, West Bengal 10, Rajasthan 9 and Madhya Pradesh 6. Andhra Pradesh and Punjab have reported 4 fatalities each, Jammu and Kashmir and Karnataka 3 each, Telangana 2 and Bihar, Chandigarh, Himachal Pradesh and Kerala 1 each.
Mumbai is the latest one to admit discrepancies in the number of deaths being reported due to novel Coronavirus. On Monday, it emerged that at least 450 deaths had not been included in the list of dead in Mumbai. At 2,250, the city already has the country’s highest death toll in the country. Before Mumbai, West Bengal and Delhi have also been forced to revise their death numbers.
Here are the top developments in India today:
Extending the parole of a Punjab based businessman accused in a drug racket case, the Supreme Court Tuesday said the coronavirus situation is not improving in the country and its only getting worse, according to PTI. The court was hearing a criminal case in which the accused Jagjit Singh Chahal has sought extension of his parole ending next month.
A bench of Justices R F Nariman, Navin Sinha and B R Gavai observed that there is no point in overcrowding the prisons when some of the accused are either out on bail or are on parole. “You see…the COVID-19 situation is not getting any better with each passing day. It is only getting worse in the country,” the bench told the Punjab government’s counsel who opposed the plea,” the apex court said. The bench perused the affidavit of Punjab government which said that the bail was granted to him in the case on February 19 and his appeal is coming for hearing on July 16.
The last rites of some COVID-19 victims were conducted by hospitals here following a directive of Home Minister Amit Shah and with the consent of their families, the Ministry of Home Affairs said on Tuesday, according to PTI.”Following Union Home Minister @AmitShah’s directions, all hospitals in #Delhi? (Central/state/private) performed the last rites of #COVID19 deceased with consent/presence of their families/relatives,” a home ministry spokesperson tweeted.
Stating there will no delays going forward, the spokesperson said said the last rites of remaining 36 deceased will be conducted by Wednesday as their families were not present in Delhi.
The United States on Tuesdya handed over to India 100 ventilators worth 1.2 million dollars, as part of President Donald Trump’s offer of assistance to New Delhi in the fight against the Covid-19 pandemic, PTI reported. The US government, through the US Agency for International Development (USAID), donated the first shipment of 100 brand-new, state-of-the-art ventilators to India to assist its fight against COVID-19, the American Embassy said in a statement.
US Ambassador to India Kenneth Juster handed over the first shipment of 100 ventilators to Indian Red Cross Society Secretary General R K Jain at an event at the IRCS national headquarters in Delhi. The COVID-19 pandemic poses an unprecedented global health threat. It is only through partnership and cooperation that we will be able to ensure a healthy future for people across the world,” Ambassador Juster said at the event. “In this spirit, the United States is pleased to provide the people of India with a donation of ventilators, made possible by the generosity of the American people and the innovation of American private industry,” he was quoted as saying in the statement.
Civil Aviation Minister Hardeep Singh Puri said India will will take a decision on resumption of international passenger flights in July if coronavirus behaves in a “predictable manner” and the entire aviation ecosystem and state governments are onboard, PTI reported. “I am often asked, when can you start international civil aviation? If you leave it to me, and if the ecosystem works, and if we have the predictability in terms of behaviour of the virus, I think in the coming month we should start taking the decision. But those decisions will not be taken by the Indian civil aviation ministry,” Puri said.
“As we have seen recently that there is a major state in south India, after we opened up, they ordered the lockdown back. I have seen this happening in other countries. We are trying to ensure that this does not happen,” the minister noted. Puri said the central government is trying to make sure that “when we take steps, they are incremental, and they are predictable, and that we increase the ways of travel domestically and that we move in the direction of opening international travel systematically without endangering and inviting a backlash”. “For us to be able to receive passengers on international routes, our states must be ready. We are in a constant dialogue with them,” he added.
The Delhi government authorities have issued an order asking the Taj Manshingh Hotel to have its rooms and premises be placed at disposal of Sir Ganga Ram Hospital (SGRH) for using it as an attached COVID-19 facility, PTI reported. The order specified directions:
* The hospital would be responsible for proper disposal of biomedical waste generated at the hotel.
* All hotel staff will be provided with protective gear and basic training to handle COVID-19 patients.
* Ambulance for transfer of patients will be the hospital’s responsibility, while food, housekeeping service and disinfecting of premises will be done by the hotel.
* The charges for using the rooms will be collected by the hospital, which will then hand it over to the hotel.
* If the need arises, the hospital can arrange for the stay of its doctors, nurses and paramedical staff at the hotel itself. The hotel and the hospital management can decide the rates mutually.
“It is critical to immediately augment Covid-19 testing capacity in containment zones of Delhi to prevent the spread of infection,” Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) wrote to the Ministry of Health. Further noting that the overall testing capacity of Delhi as on today is close to 18,000 samples per day, it emphasised, “Testing remains a cornerstone in our fight against Covid-19 and therefore ramping up testing is essentially critical to track, trace all cases of Covid-19.”
After evaluating the rapid point of care antigen detection assay known as the ‘Standard Q Covid-19’ for quick detection of the virus, it said the ICMR, AIIMS and Delhi independently is of the view that the the detection assay be used in Delhi.
Uttar Pradesh reported 507 fresh coronavirus cases and 18 deaths in the last 24 hours, Principal Secretary, Health, Amit Mohan Prasad said, as oer PTI. The death toll in the state now stands at 435 as the casloads increase to 14,598. Prasad further said the state has 5,259 active cases and about 8,904 people have recovered. He said 13,966 tests were conducted in the state on Monday, adding accredited social health activists (ASHAs) were visiting villages to trace those who have returned from other parts of the country. “ASHA workers have tracked 16.75 lakh migrant workers and among them, 1,463 were found with coronavirus symptoms,” Prasad said.
The state government’s 1.23 lakh surveillance teams have surveyed over 93.42 lakh homes and covered 4.76 crore population, he said, adding the Aarogya Setu mobile application is also being used to track suspected patients. “Acting on alerts generated by the application, 83,462 people were called and given advise to protect themselves from the infection,” the official added.
Chairing the meeting with chief ministers of 21 states and union territories, Prime Minister Narendra Modi in his opening remarks assured the CMs that India’s fight against the coronavirus was “effective” and the country has had the lowesst number of deaths due to the virus.
“When India’s fight against the Covid-19 will be anlaysed in the future, it will remebered for how we worked together and served as an example of cooperative federalism,” Modi told the CMs. Stating that the recovery rate has gone above 50 per cent, Modi said “For us the death of even 1 Indian is unsettling but it is also true that India is one of the countries where there have been least deaths due to Covid-19.”
Stressing upon the need of wearing a facial mask and washing and sanitising hands frequently, Modi recollected how in the last few weeks, thousands of Indians returned to India from abroad & hundreds of migrant workers reached their home towns. “Almost all modes of transport have resumed operations, still Covid-19 impact has not been that huge in India as in other parts of world,” he said.
Watch PM @narendramodi‘s interaction with CMs on COVID-19… https://t.co/BPpKBGIAHh
— PMO India (@PMOIndia) June 16, 2020
Delhi Health Minister Satyendar Jain tested negative for the novel coronavirus on Tuesday, a day after he was admitted to Delhi government’s Rajiv Gandhi Super Specialty Hospital after developing a high fever and experiencing a sudden drop in oxygen levels. “Due to high grade fever and a sudden drop of my oxygen levels last night I have been admitted to RGSSH. Will keep everyone updated,” Jain had tweeted this morning.Responding to the tweet, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal said, “You served the public 24×7 without taking care of yourself. Please take care of your health and get well soon.” Kejriwal was on June 9 tested for the novel coronavirus after he complained of mild fever and sore throat. However, his test report was negative.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi is expected to interact with chief ministers of 21 states and UTs at 3 pm to discuss the spike in cases as the country gradually eases lockdown restrictions. He will hold a separate interaction Wednesday for CMs from states such as Maharashtra, Delhi, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and others, which are seeing a spurt in cases and death numbers.
This will be PM Modi’s sixth virtual meeting with the chief ministers since the first phase of the lockdown was announced on March 24 to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus. On June 8, states lifted several restrictions imposed earlier in accordance with the Centre’s directives on ‘Unlock 1’.
PM @narendramodi will interact with state Chief Ministers on the 16th and 17th. pic.twitter.com/RWGeanxgHd
— PMO India (@PMOIndia) June 12, 2020
On the day fuel prices rose for the 10th consecutive day, Congress president Sonia Gandhi urged Prime Minister Narendra Modi to rollback the hike, saying his government’s decision to increase prices on petrol and diesel during the coronavirus pandemic was “wholly insensitive”.
In her letter to the Prime Minister, Sonia said, “India has faced unprecedented public health, economic and social challenges during the ongoing battle against Covid-19. I am deeply distressed that in these exceedingly difficult times since the beginning of March, the government has taken the wholly insensitive decision to increase petrol and diesel prices on no less than ten separate occasions.”
A traffic cop in Bengaluru succumbed to the virus Tuesday, marking the first death in Karnataka’s police force. Meanwhile, Karnataka Chief Minister B S Yediyurappa on Tuesday said he would request PM Modi for more relaxations, as he made it clear that COVID-19 lockdown measures were not required in the state anymore. “The lockdown is not required for Karnataka, we will request for more relaxations,” Yediyurappa said in response to a question about video conferencing with the Prime Minister. “I will request him (PM) to make way for- people to lead a normal life and for the improvement in the economic situation,” he added.
A 59 year old ASI(traffic) from VV Puram traffic police station in #Bengaluru passed away due to #COVID19. This is the first death of a Police in #Karnataka due to #COVID19. @deepolice12 @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/qGP1hw3RdQ
— Darshan Devaiah B P (@DarshanDevaiahB) June 16, 2020
Citing the ‘large-scale devastation and distress’ caused in Punjab due to the Covid-19 pandemic, Chief Minister Amarinder Singh Monday sought a fiscal aid of over Rs 80,000 crore from the Centre to ‘save lives and secure livelihoods’.
“The Centre’s urgent intervention is needed to avert any major socio-economic upheaval in the coming future, as also to assure our next generations of safe living and security of livelihood,” Amarimder said in a memorandum to Prime Minister Narendra Modi demanding an aid of Rs 80,845 crore.
Amarinder also emphasised the need for ‘administrative, structural and even statutory changes’ to ensure the safety and security of people in the new normal, given that the pandemic is here to stay for a long time.

 
Congress leader Rahul Gandhi on Tuesday attacked the BJP government in Gujarat over the state’s high COVID-19 mortality rate, saying it had “exposed” the “Gujarat model”.
Gandhi has also been attacking the Centre over its handling of the coronavirus crisis. “Covid-19 mortality rate: Gujarat: 6.25 per cent, Maharashtra: 3.73 per cent, Rajasthan: 2.32 per cent, Punjab: 2.17 per cent, Puducherry: 1.98 per cent, Jharkhand: 0.5 per cent, Chhattisgarh: 0.35 per cent,” he tweeted comparing the COVID-19 mortality rate of Gujarat with that of states where the Congress is in power. Gujarat Model exposed,” Gandhi tweeted.
Maha Vir Chakra awardee Lt Col (retd) Raj Mohan Vohra has died due to COVID-19, senior officials said on Tuesday. “He was admitted to a private hospital for a stent procedure. He died on June 14 due to COVID-19 infection,” a senior official said. His cremation was held on Sunday, the official said. The Maha Vir Chakra is the country’s second-highest gallantry award. It is awarded for acts of conspicuous gallantry in the presence of the enemy whether on land, at sea or in the air.
