PM Modi Speech Today HIGHLIGHTS: PM too afraid to talk about China in his address, says Congress
PM Narendra Modi Address to Nation HIGHLIGHTS: The Congress Tuesday targetted Prime Minister Narendra Modi for his address to the nation, saying it lacked substance and could just “have been another government notification”. The party also said the prime minister is too afraid to talk about China in his national address.
In his address to the nation today, PM Modi announced the extension of PM Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana till November end, helping over 80 crore people to avail 5 kg free food grains. The PM said this extension will cost over Rs 90,000 crore.
PM Modi said despite rising Covid-19 cases, India is still in a very stable situation due to timely decisions taken by the government. However, he also said ever since Unlock 1.0 started in the country, negligence in personal and social behaviour has been increasing.
His address comes as the government prepares for Unlock Phase II, beginning from July 1, with relaxations in night curfew, provision for more domestic flights and trains, and clearance for more than five people in a shop.
In his Mann ki Baat programme on Sunday, PM Modi had reiterated the country’s commitment to safeguard its sovereignty and territorial integrity, and had asked citizens to not be negligent as the economy reopened.

After PM Modi announced extension of the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY) by five months till November, Union Food Minister Ram Vilas Paswan on Tuesday urged state governments to complete at the earliest distribution of free PDS grains and pulses for June month under the scheme.
"I thank the Prime Minister for extending PMGKAY for five months till November. This will benefit 80 crore beneficiaries in this crisis and also during the agriculture and festival seasons in the coming months," Paswan said in a statement.
He appealed to state governments, which have not completed distribution of June month quota of free grains under the Public Distribution System (PDS), to finish it early and swiftly.
The minister also requested state governments to start lifting the required foodgrains from state-owned Food Corporation of India (FCI) for distribution under the PMGKAY for the coming months. (PTI)
Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Tuesday said the extension of the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY), a programme to provide free ration for over 80 crore people, shows the sensitivity of Prime Minister Narendra Modi to the millions of poor and their welfare.
Congratulating the prime minister for extending the scheme till November, Shah also thanked farmers and honest taxpayers of the country, saying their hard work and dedication was helping the benefits reach the poor.
"The extension of Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana shows the sensitivity of Shri @NarendraModi ji to the millions of poor and his commitment for their welfare. Nobody slept hungry in a large country like India during the Corona period, thanks to Modiji's foresight and successful implementation of the scheme," he tweeted in Hindi.
प्रधानमंत्री गरीब कल्याण अन्न योजना का विस्तार कर गरीबों को नवंबर तक मुफ्त राशन देने के लिए @narendramodi जी का अभिनंदन करता हूँ।साथ ही देश के मेहनती किसानों व ईमानदार करदाताओं का भी आभार व्यक्त करता हूँ जिनके परिश्रम व समर्पण से आज देशभर के गरीबों तक यह लाभ पहुँच रहा है।
The extension of the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY) shows Prime Minister Narendra Modi's commitment to the welfare of the poor, BJP president J P Nadda said on Tuesday.
Underlining that Modi is leading the country with alertness and sensitivity during the COVID-19 crisis, Nadda, in a series of tweets, said the prime minister should be applauded for saving lives and livelihood amid this pandemic.
Describing the extension of PMGKAY as a visionary step, the BJP chief said this shows Modi's commitment to the welfare of the poor. (PTI)
Targetting Prime Minister Narendra Modi's speech today, the Congress said the address lacked substance and it could just have been a government notification. However, the party acknowledged the PM's announcement to extend the PM Garib Kalyan Yojana scheme till November end, saying the government heeded to Congress President Sonia Gandhi's advice to extend the provisions of providing free food to the poor.
We're glad to hear that PM Modi has heeded the advice of Congress President Smt. Sonia Gandhi to extend the provisions of providing free food to the poor. https://t.co/VFaEHH3Hhl pic.twitter.com/bys8R9Oef7
Speaking on promoting local businesses, PM Modi said, "Will take economic activities forward. Will toil for AtmaNirbhar Bharat. Will be vocal for local."
"Will take economic activities forward. Will toil for AtmaNirbhar Bharat. Will be vocal for local," says PM @IndianExpress
PM Modi: Under PM Garib Kalyan Yojana, we announced a package of Rs 1.75 lakh crore. In the last 3 months, Rs 31,000 crore deposited in bank accounts of 20 crore poor families. Also, Rs 18000 crore deposited in bank accounts of more than 9 crore farmers.
In an important announcement, PM Modi said the scheme will continue till November end, aiding around 80 crore people to avail free grains. This extension will cost over Rs 90,000 crore. He credited farmers and honest taxpayers of the country.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi: We are entering into Unlock 2.0. Ever since Unlock 1.0 started in the country, negligence in personal and social behaviour has been increasing. Earlier, we were more cautious about the use of masks, social distancing and washing hands several times a day.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi: In comparison to other countries across the globe, India is still in a very stable situation, in the battle against Covid-19. Timely decisions and measures have played a great role.
In his Mann ki Baat programme on June 28, Prime Minister Narendra Modi paid tributes to the 20 Indian soldiers who had died in the violent clashes with Chinese troops on June 15 in Galwan Valley and asserted that India had given a befitting reply to those who cast an evil eye on its territory.
While addressing the nation during his monthly radio show Mann ki Baat, Modi said: “Those who cast an evil eye on Indian soil in Ladakh have got a befitting response. India honours the spirit of friendship… she is also capable of giving an appropriate response to any adversary, without shying away. Our brave soldiers have proven that they will not let anyone cast an evil eye on the glory and honour of Mother India.”
The Prime Minister also said that the “entire country comes together in paying tributes to the bravery of our soldiers who attained martyrdom in Ladakh” and added that “the entire country bows them in reverence, with gratitude”.
In his address to the nation at 4 pm today, Prime Minister Narendra Modi is likely to speak over the Unlock Phase II which is going to begin from July 1. The Centre on Monday issued guidelines for Unlock Phase II with relaxations in night curfew, provision for more domestic flights and trains, and clearance for more than five people in a shop.
However, schools, colleges and other educational institutions will remain closed till July 31, and Metro rail, multiplexes, gyms, swimming pools, bars and auditoriums will stay shut until further orders.
An order issued by Union Home Secretary Ajay Bhalla said that as per the instructions of the National Disaster Management Authority, more activities were being allowed in a calibrated manner in areas outside containment zones. Inside containment zones, lockdown measures have been extended till July 31.
 Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressed the nation through his 'Mann ki Baat' programme on Sunday. (PTI)
In his Mann ki Baat programme on June 28, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had paid tributes to the 20 Indian soldiers who had died in the violent clashes with Chinese troops on June 15 in Galwan Valley and asserted that India had given a befitting reply to those who cast an evil eye on its territory.
“Those who cast an evil eye on Indian soil in Ladakh have got a befitting response. India honours the spirit of friendship… she is also capable of giving an appropriate response to any adversary, without shying away. Our brave soldiers have proven that they will not let anyone cast an evil eye on the glory and honour of Mother India,” he had said.
The prime minister also said that the “entire country comes together in paying tributes to the bravery of our soldiers who attained martyrdom in Ladakh” and added that “the entire country bows them in reverence, with gratitude”.
Explained: Why a successful Indian resistance to China’s expansionism would redefine Asia’s geopolitics
In vigorous push for the use of locally made products, Modi said that making the country self-reliant will be a tribute to the soldiers. “Our pursuits and endeavours should be in the same direction,” he said, adding that “we should strive towards enhancing the country’s capabilities and capacities in safeguarding our borders.
