India’s second coronavirus case also in Kerala, patient in isolation
India’s second case of coronavirus has been reported in Kerala, three days after a first case was reported from Thrissur district. The patient is a student from Wuhan and came to India on Jan 24. She has been kept in isolation for monitoring, a statement from Union Health Ministry said.  At least 1,793 people are under surveillance at homes across Kerala and 70 have been admitted to isolation wards at hospitals.
Three others are currently in isolation at the Medical College in Alappuzha. The results on their blood samples are awaited. The virology Institute in Alappuzha, that was set up in the aftermath of the Nipah virus, will begin to start testing samples from today. This will help the govt in getting sample results faster.
The novel coronavirus infection that first broke out in Wuhan, China, has spread to 25 countries so far. At least 304 deaths and 14,380 cases of the virus have been reported from China. The Philippines Sunday reported the first death reported outside China, news agency AFP reported.
Kerala health minister KK Shailaja has confirmed the case positive after test result from NiV Pune. Addressing a press conference, she had earlier said, “We are very vigilant till the incubation period passes. The best treatment is to be in isolation and get lots of rest.” She also requested those in quarantine in their homes not to step out without completing the 28-day period of incubation of virus.
Ruling out the shifting of patients to New Delhi, the health minister said, “We are expressing vigilance to ensure no casualties. We don’t want anyone to die. We are adamant that whoever tests positive must already be in our treatment and in our surveillance. People should cooperate with our vigilance. We have the best isolation facilities in Kerala.”
Meanwhile, India today airlifted the second batch of 323 stranded citizens from China’s coronavirus-hit Wuhan city. On Saturday, Air India’s special flight evacuated 324 people — comprising 211 students, 110 working professionals, and three minors — from Wuhan to Delhi. None of them have tested positive for the virus
Over half of them were taken to the 300-bed isolation centre set up by the Indian Army at Manesar, while the remaining were taken to a quarantine facility in Chhawla Camp on Saturday. They are under constant supervision to keep a track of any sign of the virus.
In India, isolated cases are under supervision in Maharashtra, Telangana, Delhi among other places. To tackle coronavirus, Kerala has decided to fall back on an ambitious and exhaustive exercise that helped them contain the lethal Nipah virus in 2018 — trace and monitor every single person who has been exposed to the patient.
