Telangana, Andhra Pradesh Coronavirus Highlights: Covid tally crosses 20,000-mark in Andhra Pradesh; toll mounts to 239
Telangana, Andhra Pradesh Coronavirus Highlights: Andhra Pradesh’s coronavirus tally shot past the 20,000-mark on Monday as a record 1,322 cases were added in a day. This was the first time the fresh cases touched the four-digit mark in the state as the tally rose to 20,019 while seven deaths saw the toll mounting to 239, a government bulletin said.
Telangana continued to witness a spike in COVID-19 cases on Sunday, taking the infection count in the state to 23,902 and toll to 288. Out of the fresh cases, 1,277 were recorded from the Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC), followed by 125 in Medchal district and 82 in Ranga Reddy district, a health department bulletin said. A total of 1,166 people were discharged on Sunday, taking the total number of those cured to 12,703 so far after treatment, it said.
For the last few days, India’s novel Coronavirus numbers are being powered mainly by the surge in the four southern states of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Telangana and Andhra Pradesh. All the four are now in the top ten list of states with maximum caseload in the country, and at the moment these the only four in the top ten where the Coronavirus cases are growing at a rate faster than the national growth rate.

Telangana Governor Tamilisai Soundararajan on Monday said she has called the state Chief Secretary and a top Health department official to discuss the COVID-19 situation in the state. The governor also said she would interact with representatives of private hospitals on COVID-19 management and public grievances on availability of beds, billing and other aspects on Tuesday.
The move comes against the backdrop of allegations that some private hospitals were seeking 'exorbitant' fees from coronovirus patients. The Governor, a medical doctor herself, said she would discuss the COVID-19 situation prevailing across the state with the state Chief Secretary and the Principal Health Secretary.
Andhra Pradesh's coronavirus tally shot past the 20,000 mark on Monday as a record 1,322 cases were added in a day. This was the first time the fresh cases touched the four digit mark in the state as the tally rose to 20,019 while seven deaths saw the toll mounting to 239, a government bulletin said. The number of active cases now stood at 10,860 with the discharge of 8,920 patients so far.
On Monday, Srikakulam district reported two deaths while Visakhapatnam, Krishna, Guntur, Anantapuramu and Chittoor reported one fresh death each. Of the 20,019 cases registered in the state till date, 17,365 were locals, 2,235 from other states and 419 foreign returnees, according to the bulletin.
The Telangana Institute of Medical Sciences (TIMS), a sports facility which has been converted into a COVID-19 hospital by the state government, is ready to serve patients, Health Minister E Rajender said on Monday. He also posted a video about the facilities in the hospital. "TIMS is ready to serve #COVID19 patients," the minister tweeted.
According to him, the bed capacity of the hospital is 1,224 and oxygen facility has been provided for 1,000 beds. The government has recruited staff to work in the hospital, he had said recently. Outpatient services at the hospital had already started.
Meanwhile, official sources shared a video of a man who has been admitted to a hospital after he sought the ministers help over the phone at midnight. He had difficulty in breathing. The man said Rajender answered his call and directed his PA to help him and that he was admitted to a hospital. Rajender saved his life and he would be ever indebted to him, the man added.
TIMS is ready to serve #COVID19 patients. pic.twitter.com/507Q6MHcfo
The Telangana government’s plan to build a vaastu-compliant Secretariat is facing some bad luck. First it ran into legal hurdles, and now, the government is in a quandary whether to go ahead with demolition of the existing Secretariat buildings and construct a new one amid criticism over low testing, revenue losses and demands to convert existing structures into Covid facilities.
The High Court last week dismissed PILs filed by activists against the demolition.
Citing bad vaastu and an unscientific layout of the existing buildings, Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao had planned to build an expansive new Secretariat to accommodate all offices in one place. After becoming the first CM of Telangana, KCR was averse to using the CM’s chambers in the Secretariat and continued to work from Pragati Bhavan — his office-cum-residence at Begumpet. On June 27 last year, KCR laid the foundation stone for the new Secretariat but the High Court ordered a stay after activists filed PILs opposing the demolition
A doctor at a government hospital in Hyderabad has filed a police complaint alleging that she was charged Rs 1.19 lakh for a day by a private hospital for Covid-19 treatment in violation of the state government’s guidelines on treatment costs.
However, the hospital said that she was charged for the “services and medicines given to her”.
In her complaint at Chaderghat Police Station on July 4, Dr Asra Sultana, who is an assistant civil surgeon at the Government Fever Hospital, said that she went to the Thumbay Hospital on June 1 after she experienced problems in breathing. She had tested positive for Covid-19 two weeks ago and was in home isolation prior to the night of June 1, she said in the complaint.
After a shutdown of more than 100 days, all ASI-protected monuments will reopen for the public from Monday (July 6). The ASI’s Hyderabad circle takes care of historical monuments like the Charminar, the Warangal Fort, the Thousand Pillared Temple and Ramappa Temple in Warangal, the Alampur Temple in Gadwal district, and a couple of prehistoric excavation sites. Among these, the Golconda Fort witnesses the maximum tourist footfall.
The officials of ASI’s Hyderabad held several discussions Friday following instructions from the head office. One of their major concerns is whether the Golconda Fort falls under a containment zone demarcated by the Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation. However, after the GHMC gave a go-ahead, the ASI has decided to open the monument on July 6, Monday, but with certain curbs in place.
Even as the Golconda fort is closed for visitors, several people can be seen every day taking photographs from outside its main entrance. (Express Photo by Rahul Pisharody)
As economic activities get a fresh lease of life with the phase 2 of ‘Unlock’ kicking in, small and medium businessmen in Hyderabad are adopting to the post Covid-19 scenario by sensing the market demand.
With masks, gloves, sanitisers and face shields being sold in almost every second shop, a businessman in Hyderabad is making his own PPE kits. His only rider: these reusable suits are not for clinical purposes.
Jumpsuits with a hoodie, a clinical face mask and a separate cover for shoes — all stitched in pure cotton and hence reusable — are the products Anand Kataria has started selling from his wholesale store in the city. The suits are available in two different shades of blue and also white.
A group of techies in association with the Cyberabad Police launched a free ambulance service for transporting the dead, especially Covid-19 victims. The ‘Last Ride Service’ will be available for all communities irrespective of caste, creed and religion, said the group members of ‘Feed The Needy’ team.
As the service is being started as a pilot project, the services are currently limited to Cyberabad police jurisdiction, and between 8 am and 6 pm. “To Avail this Service Please Kindly Ring or What’s app on 8499843545. Based on need and responses we will expand it further,” they said.
The service was flagged off Saturday by police commissioner VC Sajjanar. The Commissioner stressed that the Covid-19 pandemic has put across numerous challenges and one of them was the cremation of a deceased Covid-19 patient.
The Telangana government should waive electricity bills for BPL families and SMEs for the entire lockdown period, the state Congress chief N Uttam Kumar Reddy said on Sunday. In a letter to Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao, he also demanded appropriate reduction in bill amount for other consumers. "We request you to kindly announce 100 per cent waiver of electricity bills for the lockdown period for the Below Poverty Line (BPL) families," Reddy, who is Nalgonda MP wrote.
While the power bills of all white ration card holders should be waived completely, the bill amount for others should be reduced appropriately by rectifying all the mistakes in the billing method, he further said. "Similarly, the power bills, including fixed, minimum and regular charges, of all Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) should also be waived completely for the lockdown period as they could not carry out any commercial activity," Uttam Kumar Reddy said in the letter.
Andhra Pradesh recorded a new single day high of 998 fresh COVID-19 cases on Sunday taking the overall tally to 18,697 even as the state crossed the one million mark in the number of samples tested. The state also saw 14 fresh coronavirus deaths, the highest in a day so far, taking the toll to 232, with a mortality rate of 1.24 per cent. The latest government bulletin said 391 patients were discharged in the last 24 hours, making it an overall 8,422 recoveries till date.
The surge in Karnataka and Telangana, and also in Andhra Pradesh, along with consistent high numbers from Tamil Nadu has ensured that the contribution of the five southern states in the national caseload has gone beyond 25 per cent for the first time. This number has been steadily increasing since the start of June, when it was about 17.5 per cent.
The rise has been more pronounced in the last three weeks as Telangana finally increased the number of samples it was testing. The surge in Karnataka and Telangana happened almost simultaneously, and these two currently are the states with the highest growth rates. Telangana is growing (7-day compounded daily growth rate) at 7.51 per cent while Karnataka is growing at 8.82 per cent. The current growth rate for India as a whole is only 3.47 per cent. Read more here
A Telangana police constable who distributed sweets after the birth of a son also tested positive on Saturday—as did the 12 recipients of the sweets. “These are the super-spreaders due to which the number of positive cases has gone up in Hyderabad. In spite of so much publicity, some people just refuse to follow the rules. Birthday parties, family gatherings to celebrate a birth, or youths getting together to welcome a foreign returnee are proving to be hotspots of coronavirus spread. Asymptomatic persons attending huge gatherings like this are spreading the infection,” Director of Public Health G Srinivas Rao said.
Amid a spike in cases, the Telangana government Saturday accused private labs of not adhering to testing norms prescribed by ICMR, which, it said, was leading to false positives. “We are going to issue notices to 13 private labs which are not following the norms,” Director of Public Health Rao said. One of these private laboratories has reported an extremely high sample positivity rate: With 2,672 positive cases against 3,726 total samples tested, the positivity rate is 71.7 per cent—a gross variation and discrepancy in the notified positivity rate of Covid-19 till date.
“The issue needs to be evaluated by an expert committee and until then the data of the said lab has been kept under abeyance. If this lab and other labs are found to be violating ICMR rules then we will take strict action against them,” Rao said.
A 62-year-old Sudan national, who was scheduled to board a repatriation flight to that country, passed away at RGI Airport in Hyderabad on Sunday morning. Hieba Mohammad Taha was undergoing cancer treatment in the city for the last six months, police said. Confirming the same, Shamshabad DCP N Prakash Reddy told indianexpress.com that the Sudan national developed complications before she boarded the aircraft. She was accompanied by family members at the time of incident, at around 7.30 a.m.
Telangana Health Minister Etela Rajender said he was frustrated. “There is a drastic rise in coronavirus cases in Hyderabad because people are refusing to follow basic rules. Families are hosting birthday parties, organising engagement functions, or getting together at homes to celebrate a new birth. It takes just one among them who is infected to spread the virus to dozens of others and that is what is happening in Hyderabad,” he said.
An 83-year-old ex-serviceman in Hyderabad, who was left to fend for himself at an apartment by his children, was shifted to the Government Chest Hospital after he complained of bad cold, cough, fever, and body pain on Saturday morning.
Chennaiah Goud was shifted by the municipal corporation and city police on the directions of the State Human Rights Commission (SHRC) after the neighbours refused to help suspecting him of the Covid-19 disease.
In his petition to the Commission on July 2, Gangula German Reddy, a former naib subedar in the Indian Army himself, who resides in the same apartment complex as Goud, said the apartment residents, fearing for Goud’s well being approached the Langar House police station and a sub-inspector from the police station also spoke to Goud’s son asking him to take responsibility for the aged father.
A top Hyderabad jeweller who threw a lavish birthday bash attended by at least 100 people died of the coronavirus on Saturday, sparking panic among the attendees who scrambled to get themselves tested at private labs in the city. The owner of another top jewellery chain, who, too, attended the party, also died of Covid-19 on Saturday. Officials suspect he contracted the infection from the host, who owns a high-end jewellery store in Himayatnagar area.
At least 100 members of the jewellers association attended the party recently. Two days after the bash, the host developed Covid-19 symptoms and was admitted to a private hospital.
With nearly 25,000 new infections in the past 24 hours, total number of covid cases in India now stand at 6.7 lakh. The total is now 6,73,165 -- roughly 800 cases behind Russia, which is the third worst-hit nation from coronavirus. The number of dead stand at 19,268, while there are over 4.9 lakh recoveries
Citizens Against Pollution, a Hyderabad-based organisation, has opposed the Telangana Government’s plan to set up a separate Hyderabad Pharma City saying that the existing pharma industry is responsible for severe pharma pollution and existence of antimicrobial resistant bacteria in the city’s water bodies. The organisation comprises of environment policy experts, former scientists, and environment activists.
“The idea of putting Hyderabad on the international map by setting up pharma city ignores the fact that this city is already on the international map for several reasons, including severe pharma pollution and existence of antimicrobial resistant bacteria in its water bodies. Telangana is suffering immensely from industrial pollution, particularly by pharmaceutical companies. Our rivers, lakes and groundwater are getting polluted severely. Several studies by national and international institutions have shown that hazardous chemicals have completely contaminated our groundwater. Several villages, in Medak, Nalgonda, Rangareddy and Mahabubnagar districts, are facing this problem. Health of villagers is seriously and severely affected. Their livelihoods are vanishing, and in general, poverty is on the rise. At this stage, it would be foolish to invite and establish more pharmaceutical units,’’ a statement from the organisation said.
The Karnataka government will soon build a massive pilgrim amenities complex and marriage hall at Tirumala, the hill abode of Lord Venkateswara, at an estimated cost of Rs 200 crore, a temple official said. The state would soon submit a blueprint for the construction of the Rs 200 crore mega complexes to the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) that governs the hill shrine, the official told PTI.
 At a mobile swab collection centre in Vijayawada. (PTI)
Coronavirus cases may have shot up by a whopping 14,000 in just over a month in Andhra Pradesh, but the state government said the pandemic spread is at a "manageable" level right now.
'R naught', which indicates the scale of transmission of an infection in AP is now 1.2 to 1.3, indicating that the "numbers are under control." "It becomes uncontrollable if R naught crosses 2," Special Chief Secretary (Health), K S Jawahar Reddy said. Follow Telangana, Andhra Pradesh Coronavirus Live Updates
Meanwhile, Telangana has ramped up testing facilities and is taking other measures to check the spread of COVID-19, State Chief Secretary Somesh Kumar said on Saturday. Kumar said this in a video conference held by Union Cabinet Secretary Rajiv Gauba.
"Chief Secretary Shri Somesh Kumar IAS, informed that the state has ramped up testing facilities and working on enforcing surveillance in containment zones after the visit of the central team to the state," an official release said here.
Hyderabad’s Golconda Fort opens July 6 with curbs, guides hope tourists will return
