India Coronavirus Updates, 11 June: Telangana requisitions 60 isolation coaches from railways; confirmed cases cross 2,87,000
India Coronavirus Latest Update: The Railways’ isolation coaches have finally found takers — Telangana which has requisitioned 60 of these coaches and Delhi which has asked for 10 such coaches. The coaches can be used for very mild cases that can be clinically assigned to the coronavirus care centres as per guidelines issued by the Union Health Ministry.
With nearly 10,000 new cases, India is on course to overtake Britain in the global list of countries worst affected by Covid-19. Today marks the ninth consecutive day that the country — fifth worst-hit by the pandemic — reported over 9,000 COVID-19 cases in a single day. The death toll rose to 8,102. The United Kingdom, which is the fourth worst-hit nation, has over 2.91 lakh cases.
The number of recovered cases exceeded the number of active cases again today. Over 1.41 lakh people have been discharged as against 1.37 lakh active cases. This is, however, of little significance as of now. This is neither the beginning of the end of the epidemic nor the arrival of the ‘peak’. It does not mean that the number of cases would be declining from now on.
Total recoveries and the number of active cases are not comparable metrics. Total recoveries account for everyone who has recovered from the disease since the start of the outbreak. It is an accumulated number. Active cases, on the other hand, are only those that have been infected in the last 14 days, if we assume that everyone, apart from those who die, is recovering in 14 days. So the comparison is between a number that has accumulated over three months, which is the case in India right now, and a number that has emerged in the last two weeks.
Meanwhile, India has tested more than five million for COVID-19 since the beginning of the pandemic. Almost 1.5 lakh tests are being done every day.
Follow Coronavirus in India LIVE updates
The number of people who have recovered from Covid-19 disease is now more than those who are currently sick. On Wednesday, 5,991 people were declared to have recovered, which took the total number of recoveries to 1,35,205. The number of people who are currently sick is 1,33,633.
But besides being an interesting milestone, this statistic has little significance as of now. This is neither the beginning of the end of the epidemic nor the arrival of the ‘peak’. It does not mean that the number of cases would be declining from now on. In fact, once we bring in the number of deaths into the equation, 7,745 at last count, it becomes clear that the number of recoveries is still below 50 per cent of the people who have so far been infected. Amitabh Sinha explains
Addressing the nation on the occasion of the 95th Annual Day of Indian Chamber of Commerce, Prime Minister Narendra Modi today the country must resolve to “turn this crisis into an opportunity“. “India is fighting multiple challenges along with COVID-19, including floods, locust attack, earthquakes…We have to turn crisis into an opportunity for creating Atmanirbhar Bharat and take steps to ensure that products which we import from elsewhere are manufactured in India,” he said.
A special flight arranged by actor Amitabh Bachchan to ferry 180 migrants from Mumbai landed at the Lucknow airport on Thursday morning. On arrival, the migrants hailing from Unnao, Gonda, Lucknow and other districts of the state thanked the Bollywood star for helping them reach home. Airport Director, AK Sharma, said 180 passengers have arrived by the special flight. Stepping in to help stranded migrants reach their villages, Bachchan had arranged for four special flights to send about 700 people to their homes in Uttar Pradesh. Sources close to Bachchan had said that he wanted to book a train for the migrants but the logistics did not work out.
The Supreme Court on Thursday took note of 35 children testing positive for COVID-19 in a government-run shelter home in Tamil Nadu and sought a status report from the state government including steps taken to protect the remaining children. A bench of justices L Nageswara Rao, Krishna Murari and S Ravindra Bhat also sought status report from different state governments on steps taken to protect children in shelter homes amid the pandemic, and also compliance of its April 3 order in this regard. The top court said that Juvenile Justice Committees of high courts will circulate a questionnaire among state governments and collect their feedback about the protection of children from COVID-19 in shelter homes.
	

Islamic seminary Darul Uloom Deoband has postponed its academic session till further orders due to the COVID-19 pandemic situation. The mohtamim of the seminary Maulana Abul Kasimnaumani has issued a notification stating that due to the spread of coronavirus, the institution has been closed till further orders and asking the students not to arrive at the seminary premises at Deoband.
A team of the National Humans Rights Commission (NHRC) is slated to visit the Delhi’s Lok Naik Jai Prakash Hospital on Thursday for an on-spot inspection in the wake of allegations of mismanagement in handling the Covid-19 situation.
The LNJP Hospital is a dedicated Covid-19 facility under the Delhi government. The panel had sent notices to the Health Ministry and the Delhi government on Wednesday over the pandemic situation in the national capital, and asked them to submit a report in 10 days on heathcare facilities and related issues.
“A team of the National Human Rights Commission, led by its member Jyotika Kalra will visit LNJP Hospital in Delhi around 3 pm today for an on-spot inspection of the facilities in the wake of allegations that there is mismanagement and coronavirus patients are being denied admission and treatment,” a senior official of the NHRC said.
The strike called by junior doctors at Hyderabad’s Gandhi General Hospital entered day 3 even as state Health Minister Eatala Rajender invited them to another round of talks on Thursday evening.
Nearly 450 doctors sat on strike on Tuesday evening following an alleged attack on junior doctors by attendants of a deceased Covid patient at Gandhi hospital, which is the nodal hospital for Covid-19 treatment in Telangana.
The junior doctors, who have been on Covid duty since the beginning of March, demanded that Covid treatment be distributed among other state-run hospitals instead of mounting pressure on Gandhi hospital. Citing exhaustion, they blamed the state government for showing no interest in fresh recruitment which, they said, is the need of the hour. They raised the immediate need for specialist doctors, broad specialty doctors, nursing staff, paramedic staff (ICU technicians and lab technicians), ward boys, and patients care providers (permanently through HMSRB) to avoid crumbling of available medical infrastructure.
Four days after the places of worship reopened in the napital capital, the Shahi Imam of the Jama Masjid decided that “no congregational prayers will be performed inside the Jama Masjid till June 30”. At 8 pm tonight, the Jama Masjid will be shut down again.
The Imam, Syed Ahmed Bukhari, said that this decision has been taken keeping in mind the “spike in Covid-19 cases” in the capital city. The last congregational prayers at the Jama Masjid will be held today at 5.30 pm and 7.30pm. At 8 pm, it will be shut down, and till June 30, only five people who live within the premises will pray inside.
In a letter announcing the move, Bukhari said, “Coronavirus is spreading exponentially in Delhi. The number of deaths and patients are continuously increasing. There is a dearth of bed in government and private hospitals… There are reports that in a mortuary of a Delhi hospital, there is no space left for the dead bodies…”
The Railways’ isolation coaches have finally found takers — Telangana which has requisitioned 60 of these coaches and Delhi which has asked for 10 such coaches.
The coaches can be used for very mild cases that can be clinically assigned to the coronavirus care centres as per guidelines issued by the Union Health Ministry.
Telangana has asked for 60 isolation coaches to be stationed in 3 locations- Secunderabad, Kachiguda: Railway’s @IndianExpress
— Avishek Dastidar (@avishekgd) June 11, 2020
According to the integrated coronavirus plan developed by the health ministry and the NITI Aayog, these coaches can be used in areas where the state has exhausted all facilities and needs to augment capacities for isolation of both suspected and confirmed COVID-19 cases.
“Sixty coaches have been requisitioned in Telangana for Secunderabad, Kachiguda and Adilabad. Ten coaches have been requisitioned in Delhi,” the railways said.
Insisting that India is not in the community transmission stage, the government on Thursday said the country’s first sero-survey on Covid-19 spread has found that lockdown and containment measures were successful in controlling a rapid rise of infections, but a large proportion of the population still remains susceptible.
“India is not in community transmission. We have to continue with our strategy of testing, tracing, tracking, quarantine and containment measures; we should not give up our guard on these,” Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) Director General Balram Bhargava said while addressing a media briefing.
The sero-survey has two parts, the first being, estimate fraction of population that has been infected with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19, in general population and the second being, estimate fraction of population that has been infected with the coronavirus in containment zones of hotspot cities, Bhargava said, adding that the first part has been completed while the second is underway.
The night curfew imposed by the Odisha government will be relaxed for a few hours on Friday to let people go shopping for the upcoming three-day Raja festival, an official said here on Thursday.
On Thursday, the state government, in a partial modification of its June 1 order, announced that the night curfew on June 12 will be enforced from 10 pm instead of 7 pm in order to enable people to do their pre-festival shopping.
In its June 1 order, the government imposed a curfew from 7 pm to 5 am till June 30, amid a spike in COVID-19 cases. This apart, the government also introduced weekend shutdown in 11 districts.
However, all other conditions of the June 1 order and subsequent amendments remain unchanged, Chief Secretary A K Tripathy said in the notification issued by the office of the Special Relief Commissioner.
The Calcutta High Court reopened its doors for the physical hearing of cases on Thursday after a gap of over two and half months since normal functioning was stopped owing to the Covid-19 crisis, PTI reported.
A few cases were heard before the division bench presided by Chief Justice T B N Radhakrishnan and other benches with some advocates present, as most lawyers stayed away from attending the court for physical hearing following a decision by the Calcutta High Court Bar Association not to attend proceedings citing safety issues over the pandemic.
Thermal scanners were used at the entry gates for checking body temperature of lawyers, litigants and court staff. The high court authorities have arranged for state-run buses for transporting its staff to and from the court.
Himachal scientists seek grant from Centre to develop anti-Covid drug from seabuckthorn berry
Following reports of the effectiveness of a wild berry against the novel coronavirus, scientists from Himachal Pradesh have sought grants from the Centre to study the antiviral activity of the berry, which grows in high-altitude, cold deserts of the Himalayas.
Seabuckthorn, locally known as chharma, is a wild shrub which grows naturally in Lahaul and Spiti and parts of Kinnaur. It is known for its immunity-boosting and medicinal properties, said Dr Virendra Singh, a professor at the agricultural university in Palampur and general secretary of the Seabuckthorn Association of India.
According to the Korea Biomedical Review, scientists at the Ewha Womans University Medical Center, South Korea, have claimed that seabuckthorn berry’s lactic acid bacteria can check the spread of the coronavirus by inhibiting the activation of purine, the energy source required by the virus for its mutation.

